The hardest part about everything currently labeled AI is that its not AI, its SI. It's simulated intelligence, call and responses that seem like intelligence (both video games and chat programs). Even considering an RPG that incorporates chat "AI" into dialogue would be too viable to be trusted. The tech isn't there.
Here's a secret... Many times developers have to make AI worse so that they don't beat the player's ass. Capcom could make a Street fighter that's impossible to beat. Any first person shooter could have AI land perfect shots on you and move in a completely erratic fashion.
People think they want smarter, more realistic ai in games, but they don't. It's hard to design enjoyable and predictable experiences with an ai that's too smart, and behavioral AI is way harder to design than chatgpt-like ai that's just a language model. Many game developers have talked about that, and that's why the last time we've seen a smart AI was in F.E.A.R that came out almost 20 years ago

If you just want more realistic npc dialog in games, gpt integration in games is already a thing.
NPC dialogue seems like the natural fit for it, and games that are already heavily reliant on procedural generation.

I don't know as our current AI tech is good enough for it, but realizing what a game like Daggerfall was trying to do seems like something that could make really good use of AI.

When it comes to actual enemy AI, I hear a lot of stories about developers trying to have smarter AI and testers simply not liking it and thinking it's cheap. It's hard to make an AI that is both smart *and* fun to fight against.
Where AI will be most useful in gaming is in development, not the actual gameplay. At least that's my prediction.

Edit: I take that back. Kind of. AI could be really cool in something like a stealth based PvE. Like, imagine you're Sam Fisher and you have to outsmart and outstealth an AI assassin or some shit. That would be interesting to see.
AI can do a lot of things. 

But there are also a lot of things only a human can do.
Nope.  Video game AI is mostly parlor tricks, smoke, and mirrors.  Even games historically touted for amazing AI (like FEAR or MGS) just had standard AI and used stage design and scripted sequences to make the AI appear clever. But, it's all vision cones, hotbox triggers, and nested if/then statements. 

Now, chat AIs have become a trendy topic of discussion and everyone is romanticizing and overblowing them. But that's a chat AI.  It's for absorbing words, organizing them, and spitting them back out in coherent sequences to give the illusion of intelligence. It doesn't learn so much as acquire and regurgitate.   It's bacially this generations flying car or moon colony.  Even the OpenAI Ceo knows what I'm saying. He looks at chatAI as fairly crude and simple. 

In order for video game AI to get better, it has to be able to see it's environment (while understanding what it sees), have positional awareness, and anticipate deception. The StarCraft AI project already proved that to be outside the abilities of modern AI. It couldn't get out of gold rank and needed map hacks.  They copied a pro and created a dozen copies of that, then pitted them against one another for like months, then beat the pro.  That's what got written about - not the reality of it's limitations.
In many ways.  Pathfinding, adaptive difficulty, AI generated dialog, NPC behavior.
Honestly the peak of video game AI was like 10 years ago with npc invaders in Dark Souls 2
No, current AI stuff is not the same as game AI. There isn't even a correlation, game AI is literally not Artificial Intelligence. It would, at best, be what you actually described here. Not improving NPC AI, but using AI to track in-game stuff and produce little voice clips or whatever. Actually developing more convincing enemy AI is a whole separate, massive thing, which I dont think some GPT-like AI could help you with.
Probably not, but they'll be able to tell you to go eff yourself now and call you a hacker.
Yo, NPCs w/Chat GPT!? My mind is melting.
The current language model advancements may impact games eventually, but they are so computationally expensive that it will be a while before we see anything running on the game hardware itself.

Most likely the earliest impact will be language models being run on the cloud as an input into the game.  This means that there will be significant cost to hooking this up, so it would have to be a major draw of the game to be worthwhile.
You can’t implement such AI into games because they are unpredictable and will do random things, which for games can mean bugs, getting stuck on a level, random issues, random behavior etc. 

Same as if you told all actors on set of a movie to improvise all their lines, and hope for a good movie. But at least actors are human and know how to behave. AI doesnt and would do random things that dont make sense.

Games need to be tightly controlled in order to deliver the vision and quality the makers of the game intended for you to have. And putting a random AI that does random stuff is just a lousy bet.
Probably won't happen for a while, the current ai models that can do this stuff are quite hard to run, you can only get fast results in a datacenter. And as they live on the GPU, a powerful pc that could run it wouldn't have any resources left for the rest of the game.   


But yeah, once it becomes viable, either by dedicated hardware (like what apple is doing with their ai cores), or paired down specialized models that are easier to run, I see ai generated voices as having the most potential. (especially for things like rpgs where its been a bottleneck for how complex the dialog trees can get)
10000x

Its cool, but chatGPT is basically just condensed google currently.
Tech may not be there now, but within 2 years out entire social existence will be transformed, fingers crossed for the better.
And also a player's perspective of what is a fair AI usually is skewed in favor of the player. Your comment reminded me of an article, I cannot remember the game, of a FPS game being developed and they wanted to add smarter AI.

So they programmed some enemies to be able to flank the player. You'd encounter a group of enemies, they'd fire on you, an enemy would yell "Go flank them!" and a small group of the enemies will attempt to walk around obstacles or other rooms and flank the player.

Well what ended up happening in playtests was that they got a lot of complaints of "enemies being able to spontaneously appear behind you without any warning." Even though they made sure enemies would be yelling orders to each other to flank the players. They found out players generally would tunnel vision enemies in front of them, and having a smarter AI that could circle around the player was too unfair from a player's perspective.
That last part is what everyone else seems to think as well

But i think as AI is improved and expanded upon in the next decade we're going to start seeing it used for alot of things that as of right now, sound unthinkable, and alot of it is  probably unpredictable, but I think with time, almost anything you can think of and more is going to be possible. Maybe i should have phrased the post like; assuming there are no limitations to AI, what sort of features would you like to see in games using AI?
OpenAI from dota could beat pros, so it’s within the realm of possibility for current day AI
This is true, but you’re also glossing over how impressive this technology actually is right now. ChatGPT is *almost* a real life example of Searle’s “Chinese Room”. If anyone doesn’t know what that is, look it up.

So, it underscores how and why a conscious artificial general intelligence cannot be created solely algorithmically, without hardware redesign, as modern neuroscience theories such as Integrated Information Theory suggest. But, it also means that *if* we somehow accidentally create a “true AI”, it may be damn hard for us to realize it. Conversely, if someone *deliberately* created one and released it on the world, it may be damn hard to recognize it for the same reason.

Simulated intelligence technology will probably change our world in ways that are difficult to predict right now, and that’s without the inevitable offshoots and advancements that will occur. Saying it is “this generation’s flying car or moon colony” is a huge understatement. As a neurologist, I find this technology to be somewhat scary because it is a great example of what neuroscientists, philosophers of mind and AI researchers have been saying for *decades* now, and I personally didn’t expect it to be culturally adopted so fast.

I think all of us would love a smarter Alexa. It’s what comes afterwards that is potentially problematic, and it is totally up to humans to determine the trajectory that artificial intelligence research goes in. Without being too alarmist, now is the time that we should be thinking about the ethical, cultural and legal ramifications of it - not after the fact. To think that we will do AI research responsibly is hopelessly naive in my opinion. Pretty much all of human history disproves that thought.
AI in the RE remakes are super impressive.
Yeah, I want to say this was something a Bungie dev said or potentially FEAR devs from monolith but those enemies actually do flank sometimes.
This is a friendly reminder to [read our rules](https://www.reddit.com/r/Showerthoughts/wiki/rules).

Remember, /r/Showerthoughts is for showerthoughts, not "thoughts had in the shower!"

(For an explanation of what a "showerthought" is, [please read this page](https://www.reddit.com/r/Showerthoughts/wiki/overview).)

**Rule-breaking posts may result in bans.**
Some mad lads in the Skyrim modding community have done this, albeit only in a rough prototype and the response time can be a bit long, but it’s a feasible concept

Whether that’s a good thing or not is up for debate.
I wonder if the npcs will get bored and beat the game for the hero?
I can't wait for an AI NPC to [hallucinate](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hallucination_\(artificial_intelligence\)) false tips on how to complete a quest.
You know? I think the closest we've experienced in the past is Psycho Mantis in Metal Gear Solid; reads your memory card and gives specific responses on certain games.
I can't wait for a Zelda NPC to say, "Are you okay? You were cooking over there, non-stop, for hours."
"As an AI language model I am incapable of going on an adventure with you. Is there something else I can help you with today?"
Doki Doki is going to lose a lot of its impact in the age of AI
You seem hopelessly lost! All the NPCs are talking about you. My conscious won't allow me to give you the quest I normally hand out. Would you like me to teleport you back to the tutorial zone, or perhaps uninstall the game entirely?
Yeah and the game will be 2000 gigs, require a 24/7 internet access, permission to use your mic/location, access to your email address, your full legal name and social, cost $120 dollars, and then 3 years later when the ai companies and game companies have a disagreement they'll remove the ai and leave dialogue-less npcs.
Actually, it's not in the interest of the game developer  to put advanced Ai for NPCs. Firstly because it's expansive in calculation (but soon this won't be a problem anymore as OP said), secondly because the developer needs to know/predict what the NPC will do, in order to make and control the best game design.
I’m not so sure about pretty soon. 

Games are hardly delivering on new concepts today. Just think about the best games in the last five years: they deliver an extremely polished version of what already existed. We really haven’t seen significant innovation, just better versions of what we already know. RDR2 might be the only exception in the way that the world moved around you. 

Granted, AI might make that easier.
There is a demo mod for skyrim that does exactly that, plus a companion mod that work with chatgpt.
Seen this mentioned elsewhere.  It is a very good use case for Ai.
Of course; why wouldn’t a corporation want to replace a bunch of human writing jobs with an AI? That’s all entertainment media will be if this keeps up. Three companies will own everything, and they’ll have whatever top AI programs of the day making all their products, licensed for a less than the salary of one man.
I'd prefer NPCs being able to properly pronounce my characters‘ names. It'd be so much more immersive instead of only being called dragonborn in the 58th rema(ke/ster) of the game.

Skyrim VRAIRT 4K
Games are moving towards the long awaited closeness to reality. It is already possible, but there are no such games yet. I have no doubt that efforts already exist to accomplish this.

AI-generated responses are just better known in the mainstream these days. But many more features are coming, such as real-time fluid simulation, human characters realistic to the point of being mistaken for real people, and the light simulation that just got better to the point where several light simulation issues are resolved.
It is also expected that quantum computers will be possible in 5 years, so we will eventually have superior processing and storage when this becomes available to the average user in a few years.

The [Two Minute Papers](http://youtube.com/@TwoMinutePapers) YouTube channel showcases many of these advancements.
I wonder if this will make DnD Game Masters obsolete. Like everyone just talks to an AI that knows the story and everyones stats and will generate answers depending on that.
Animal crossing knew when I hit the reset button without saving; and the npc for sure let me know about it.
There was an indie VR game a few years ago that used AI for NPCs and theyll have conversations with you about anything. I saw youtube video of it during the pandemic.
Responsive dialogue is already a thing but AI would make It more viable
That would be sick! Could you imagine randomly generated missions?
For indie games sure, but for bigger games it will take at least 3 to 4 years to make something really impressive.
Why limit it to just gaming history? You have an enormous digital footprint out there for AI to tap into.

Don't be surprised if NPCs start talking about topics related to your YouTube viewing history, products you've looked up on Amazon or political movements you've donated to. From there it's a short hop to embedded advertising.
Well it’s cool the data privacy concerns are insane and should not be put into games until we have government regulation on what can be done with data collected from us while playing.
This isn't really a shower thought, just an obvious observation. 🤔 

A real shower thought about this would be more like: soon people will be forming better relationships with npcs in games they play than with people in their actual life.
Plz, a game where AI is trained on LoL and CS:GO ingame chat
Something like this can give the socially awkward a way to practice. Better than nothing anyway, which is what many have.
I think we'll see it earlier as narrators. It takes a pretty simple and cheap model to comment on how your 2k custom player has been performing this season.
"Mankind is doomed to an existence under the rule of robots, and there's nothing you can do to stop us"

"Excuse me?"

"I mean, I have a letter here to deliver directly to you"
But first, AI language models with training have to be less taxing on the GPU. I'd say it's only possible after people are able to run 30B models on 6gb vram.
[deleted]
There's the mod, but I wouldn't be surprised if skyrim came out again with this integrated in the game. 

I can already picture the NPC's saying:

"Aren't you that fucker that keeps shouting all day long? I haven't had a good night sleep in weeks."
That dude trying to get me to rescue a settlement better not try to guilt trip me after saying no a couple times
We already have that. I started Shouting and after the graybeards called me to High Hrothgar, some guy named  Miraak sent cultists after me. I killed them both, but it was scary never the less.
We'll likely only see one or two games like that. Just like the nemesis system from the Shadow of Mordor games, someone will copyright the AI system and then never use it again, just to block other companies from making money.
Imagine how dull Disco Elysium would be if characters just stood around reciting Wikipedia descriptions of the plot.

“As your limbic system, I cannot tell you about your ex-wife. I am involved with lower order emotional processing of input from…”

Imagine Portal, except GlaDOS narrates EVERYTHING you do in a robotic monotone.

Ugh.
Given some of the things we do in video games, I'm not entirely sure I want this to happen.
Jeez, and I thought video game writing couldn’t get any worse.
This is the AI in video games that I am really excited for. Don’t use it to write stories or make major components but use it to make NPCs come alive. Have them do realistic stuff and make genuine comments on my actions.
Games with voice acting would struggle to do this IMO. It would be plain as day with the crunchy AI voice.
reality: first company that does this patent the thing and no one can ever use it again

edit: as it was with the nemesis system using AI to improve NPCs combat in shadows of mordor
And at what point do the AI get too sentient to make playing the game ethical
I'm excited for games with entirely fleshed out lore that each NPC is only programmed with select knowledge. All questions can be typed out, and all dialog responses are AI generated based on preprogrammed specific knowledge of lore.
Soon we will also have AI generated mouths for over dubbing of films. So, for example, if the film is shot in English and dubbed over with Spanish we won’t be able to tell it was even shot in English.
There’s actually a few games with this mechanic already. One I’m pretty sure that has this is a game called Rain World.
It would be cool for VR games. Essentially AI actors in every role that could answer any question I asked them, within that characters perimeters. But then this also means you would have to teach an AI to be able to lie.
No we won’t. Just a reminder, no one has created actual AI yet. What you’re seeing in todays markets is just marketing lingo and software.
Finally, a reasonable prediction for AI. I swear some people seem to think AI is gonna be wiping their asses for them in the next few years 🙄.
[removed]
[deleted]
[deleted]
It's kinda funny I just had the same thought yesterday when thinking about Skyrim. It really won't be far off. I wouldn't be surprised if we start seeing it to some extent by the end of the decade, maybe even sooner.
Imagine Minecraft villagers equipped with AI to help them build and utilize villages better. Maybe even give the player the ability to chat with them through a text interface on the trading screen. You could ask if there's anything interesting nearby, what resources they need for their village, attempt to convince them to lower prices, or just have a chat.

Hell, you could come to form memorable relationships with certain villagers, like "oh yeah that's Tony the Blacksmith, he helped me find a woodland mansion and a couple of ruined portals so I built him a bigger house."
That would be a welcome change. Usually these games are isolating - you are just doing your mission by yourself
Generated NPC content will all be advertisements. Some for micro transactions, some for IRL products, but all opportunities for you to spend more money.
This will be great for Sim games. Imagine raising a baby that's learning, but you can teach it to steal and use daggers.
Wait until bosses are AI. They learn not only what strategy you are using to beat them, but also what everyone else in the world is doing. Then they adapt to counter.
Everyone’s beloved Animal Crossing then became racist and they had to kill the game :(
About damn time RPGs got "next gen". Most of the current RPGs are based on the open world formula of Dragon age Inquisition/The Witcher 3 and those games  were published in 2014-15.
[deleted]
Look at game industry rn and say it again. We are going down the slope. Maybe Kojima will do it his next game, others? Nah

Edit: If it will reduce costs in the end, then after first titles every game will be like it.
Let's just hope they can generate better radiant quests.

Also, how long until some jackhole "teaches" the AI to spam NPC responses with derogatory slurs?
We already have. I researched and created some systems for this early in my master's degree a couple of years ago.
There will be many bad implementations of this at first but one day, oh boy, one day somebody is going to nail it and the immersion is going to be fucking unreal.
Imagine all the lore in a the game is tailored according to your actions, like if every book you find in Skyrim is a full novel writen by AI on the spot but somehow tailored to your gameplay.   I can also imagine games like No Man's Sky could benefit a lot from this, since almost all of their NPC's are randomly generated.
It's really a dream tbh, utilising LLMs to generate plot in realtime. Maybe the game will only be shipped with an overarching main questline and a set of side quests, but the majority of the full quest list — and maybe the fine details — are entirely AI generated in realtime. The game can be potentially never-ending yet non-repetitive.
Pretty soon people will Google if something is a thing before posting on reddit that something will become a thing
[Check out this experiment of using ChatGPT to give an NPC life-like conversation skills.](https://youtu.be/7xA5K7fRmig)
You still gonna kill all those npc’s now that they’ll be using previous encounters etc to beg for their lives? lol
it probably makes the in-game world more dynamic and immersive
Don't tell that to the dragon age developer's we won't see dreadwold until 2055
we are so "close" to the (VR) generative games where X quest can affect Y quest but also the Z quest of another player if you finish something.  (look for World's Strongest Troll manhwa as a small example)
Question: Wouldn't that be just a "cosmetic" thing in a sense? 

NPC responses are limited to what the player can ask, given the obvious and necessary limitations that must be kept in order to have a cohesive storyline.

So, realistically, wouldn't that just be kinda the same as if having pre planned NPC dialogue that corresponds with your in game actions?
I wonder how hard it would be to make an AI NPC fall in love. Better raise my charisma.
I saw this episode of Star Trek and it didn't turn out so well.
Spacebourne 2 has AI generated quests, interactions and voices.
I think there are mods already in the works for Skyrim and Stardew valley.
As long as big studios are milking absolute cash cows of minimum effort games, smaller studios are just going to rinse and repeat their efforts and no actual progress will ever happen.
Didn't Rockstar patent something like this about a year ago? It's believed to have something to do with GTA 6 and the NPCs in future titles.
And it will be interesting the first time it happens, but then never again after that.
Don't get your hopes up too soon about how good it will be out how it will even effect your gameplay.
Games can already do that fairly simply, assuming we’re talking about an rpg like Skyrim. If you’ve completed a certain quest line or have a certain amount of karma etc the npc’s can and do address you differently, it just depends how deep the devs want to go with it.
I'll just be minding my business in eso then some random npc goes "you let that woman murder that doctor in phaer! Shame on you!" And i think its the only negative npc post-quest mention i ever get
Pretty soon there will be AI that read stuff from outside of the game and start judging you for other things you’re doing. Or the hours that you’re playing at. 

“It’s 2AM again. Don’t you have work in the morning?”

*responses generated by AI appear on a dialogue wheel*
And someone will use it for something pornagraphic immediately.
They can just pay actors to record more voicelines. AI should only come into play with saying custom character names.
"You've been here doing the same thing day in, day out, for weeks my friend! You scream out in frustration your pleas for recompense for your time to no avail, yet still you return, venturing deep into these catacombs each night. What is your purpose in suffering, adventurer? Why do you insist on tormenting yourself? What possible thing could you gain in being here? Is it treasure you seek from this pixelated realm beneath the maze of wires and circuitry, or is it merely an escape from an ever more grim reality outside of these generated walls?"
Don’t forget recommending DLC and bonus content you can buy in an in-world appropriate fashion.
what i want most is for AI voice to be able to finally pronounce my custom character name.
Then AI combat that learns from its and your mistakes, learns our patterns, and becomes so ungodly overpowered nobody can get a single kill… then they’ll get out…
What would make it cooler is they also react to your social media posts.
Why limit it to your recent "in-game occurrences"?  I can imagine an AI NPC that looks at your Amazon purchases or your Goodreads book ratings and modifying its personalities based on the type of fantasy books you read.  Or one that takes elements of its backstory based on your travel history, favoring whatever in-game culture is most similar to places you go on vacation.  Etc.

Of course, I can also imagine an NPC that uses your Amazon browsing history that offers you an extra 10,000XP if you purchase this item off Amazon that you've looked at a couple of times but not pulled the trigger on...
More like relevant to your recent purchases and facebook comments
Bold of you to assume that lazy game devs with actually write and voice that amount of dialogue.
I thought about this recently watching a video of an ancient game called Lords of the Realm 2. It's a precursor to 4k strategy games and it has diplomacy. The fun thing is that when you send someone a diplomatic message you write it out yourself. I always thought it was a quirky feature. Obviously overall meaningless as the AI always reacts the same regardless, but it now you could have AI react to the actual message, which would be fantastic.
That’s actually kinda weak, the AI could go online and skim news articles and pick up relevant REAL world information and talk to a player about it. Imagine playing a game set in the current day and the NPC can ask you things like “Did you catch the game?” Or say things like “Man I wish the Ukrainian war would stop.”  

The game would never get old because it would constantly talk to you as if it was current day.
This is going to suck for a good while, but at some point it actually will get implemented well and make for some really unique "living world" type shit.

But man, those first few years are going to be rough
yeah cool but can i make npc suicidal to the point he know he is in a game and his existance doesn't bring anything to my storylane = he is usless
Soon it will be hard to tell if you play with real person in your favorite mmorpg
Someone has actually started doing this on the unity sub Reddit for an rpg. Early stages and slow, but a brilliant idea.
I'd say Bethesda already does this. There is no way their NPC:s are MEANT to be like *that*
That actually makes a lot of sense, as I can see that happening!
Implemented correctly into an RPG this will define the next generation of games. Graphics can only get so good. Next is AI performance.
Seriously, it's only going to get crazier from here, graphics are damn near realistic these days so they gotta invest in other newer avenues
That might also mean we can write up our own responses/speeches
I like this but I feel as if voice actors would lose work. Depending on how many companies use it
Actually, using proper AI's to control NPC's, both antagonists and neutral, is probably the best use I can think of for AI's right now.
I felt like the red dead 2 npcs where alive lol used to shame me for the stuff I had done
[removed]
And, as an idea I had for a Black Mirror episode if that show accepted specs shows, what happens when the NPCs become so "alive" core parts of the game become morally questionable to play
I think it would fit in certain games to make them a lot more

Games where npcs are pretty important would be good
As someone who is prone to exhausting dialog trees this idea terrifies me. Every rpg will turn into a socialization simulator. The abject horror!
Right now this would be crazy expensive to use the services or host yourself at scale so any results we see will be heavily compromised by that alone, but that's just a waiting game as it gets cheaper and inference gets easier relative to hardware.

A GPU with 32gb of VRAM could right now hold a rudimentary LLM while also playing a game, but it wouldn't be anywhere close to openAI levels yet.

But with enough local compute resources you could AI generate dialog and then voice-act it in real time with software we have today.
Im scared to load my modded skyrim save
It's neat, but the response time makes it not so great. Once they don't have to sit for 5 to 10 seconds and think of a response it will be really cool
Lol being saying ever since Chat GPTs been getting posted everywhere that this shit will change ES/Fallout games wildly. I cannot wait for it.
Once the process has been ironed out its a game changer 

As long as the initial performance is human captured first. Contracts will start including permissions given for in studio AI scripts to use the performers voice likeness etc.

There is gonna be a wild west expansion moment with ai within gaming very soon. Andnits exciting and scary.

I watched that Skyrim example this morning and while rough it has HUGE potential.
You can already download it:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NNFVyeTBYAU

https://www.nexusmods.com/skyrimspecialedition/mods/89931?tab=posts
I will wait to be terrified until the modern gaming version of that one feature in Eternal Darkness, where it read your memory card and then threatens to delete all your files. Just imagine one of the Skyrim guards starting up with his "I was once an adventurer like you\~" then interrupting himself as he gets a good look at you and makes a joke about your search history or how you plug-pulled in another game.
Yea it’s about an 8 minute wait for a response
I did see someone doing the same thing for new vegas. Looked intresting as a concept
And then another mad lad took that mod and added it into vr. Crazy stuff
Does that mean you can beat Nazeem's ass until he learns respect on your name?
Stardew Valley has a "chat with the NPC" dialogue mod in a closed beta, but that has neither voices nor meaningful interaction(?) with the game world.
Of course Skyrim will be the first.
"Ah, so *you're* the guy who likes putting buckets on peoples' heads, eh?!"
Literally Free Guy
There are games where the ai(bots) started farming and manipulating game markets.
(Edit) I really tried to find the article but can’t filter out all the new ai news.
I know AI is impressive at faking a real conversation but they still don't feel actual emotions. I hope everyone knows this.
If you deploy this concept in a detective game, it becomes a feature not a bug.
But you know.... that kinda works? People misremember or believe in false things all the time. 

So long as that NPCs can the remember its old response when you come back later, I think it could work.
[deleted]
Simple answer: don’t leave that up to ai and let humans determine exactly what should be said and when for tips
“Oh, ho, ho, no… \***I**\* say when we’re *done.*”
I’ve always liked to imagine a modern equivalent.

“You like playing trippy games… like Portal 2, Mayhaps? 

Still don’t believe me? I’ll look deeper, into your SOUL!

*three second pause*

Dear god…”
That shit fucked with 16-18 year old me. Idr exactly when it was, but yah
Wasnt there a similar thing with scarecrow in a batman game iirc?
right?
I somehow really doubt Nintendo would jump on that. They seem the type to want to curate every bit of the game meticulously. I get that they kind of let go a bit with zelda a bit (allowing for more than 1 solution to puzzles). But dialogue is gonna be a step too far for a long time for them, methinks.
That ending FUCKED with me
That wasn't the first one to 4th wall break. It's predecessor was called "You, me and her" I believe.
I can see most of that happening
I can't speak for most of that, but as for the 2000 gigs and price jump, things should be alright. 

A game wouldn't use so much GB unless it was readily available to the general public, or their game will probably bomb. Same could be said for internet speed for downloads. Both of which id be happy to see.

The price of games believe it or not have gone down quite a bit. I'd recommend watching videogamedunkeys video on gaming prices. He has pretty decent humor in it to make it more entertaining.
[deleted]
Eh. More likely we'll need dedicated AI cards that will house a general AI that will get prompts from the game.

They could also use it to replace Cortana/Google/etc.
I doubt we will see Advanced AI for stuff that is integral to the plot anytime soon, but I could totally see AI being used to Generate random conversations among NPCs and that sort of thing.

Oblivion had these random conversations take place that felt really stilted and odd, but they actually did go a long ways towards making the world feel real. Hey I could generate an infinite number of these conversations incredibly easily, and even tailor them specifically to player action.

You know, a player steals something from someone's house, and the next day they are down in the Square complaining that someone stole their vase.
It's pretty ridiculous for you to state that as a fact, there would be plenty of games where AI conversations would add to game design. There are also many where it would not
>I’m not so sure about pretty soon. 

https://youtu.be/d6sVWEu9HWU
Still kinda bitter at [Warner Brothers getting a patent](http://patentarcade.com/2021/02/warner-brothers-granted-patent-for-nemesis-system-from-middle-earth-video-games.html#:~:text=The%20'179%20Patent%20is%20valid,enforce%20its%20patent%20against%20others.) for the Nemesis system from the Middle Earth games.

Probably one of the more unique concepts to come out in gaming and will be 2035 until any developer can use without permission from WB.
Yeah, the average game feels less "Alive" then ones from the 00's, ain't no way the industry is going to suddenly advance way past that other than maybe Rockstar. But that's their whole thing.

Fucking Cyberpunk cam out with all these character options with no effect yet Saints Row 2 actually has NPCs comment if you gave your character a big rack.
I don't remember what the name of this fallacy is but just because something's never been the case doesn't mean it never will be
>> RDR2 might be the only exception in the way that the world moved around you. 

Could you explain how? I’ve never played RDR2 but this intrigues me to start.
Probably the safest place to implement AI.
Bethesda recorded a *lot* of voiceover to (just about) make that possible with one character in fallout 4. From memory the list of accurately pronounced names included fuckface and shithead just for good measure.
CHAMPION!

Honestly I preferred games like mass effect where they just give you a name
Say what you will about fallout 4 but the butler robot calling you by your name is incredible and blew my mind on my first playthrough.
It may help those who want to play games like DnD but have no one around to party up with... or just want to play solo.
Doubt it. I know for certain that I would rather play with my friends at one of our places in person. I don't think anything will beat the shenanigans that ensue when 4-8 adult nerds meet up in a room to roll dice and play pretend.
When I first played New Horizons, I thought it automated, so I decided to quit after setting up the tent to download a random house item from the Nintendo store. My little animal friends were deleted from existence. And the worst thing is I don't even use what I downloaded.
I think 3-4 years might even be generous for the end-goal. Soon is a pretty relative word.
[deleted]
Sounds like a huge breach in privacy, not like it's anything that hasn't been done before. For the sake of ethics and ease of use, I would hope that accessible information would be confined to the game itself.
Epic NPC Man did a vid here recently where a random guard vows to find the player in real life.
AI needs a testing ground, releasing it publicly on everything is dangerous because we don't have active constraints on the information it consumes and how it utilizes it.

Video games are an excellent medium for a testing ground.
A model doesn't _have_ to be ran on some server. It can be relatively small and computationally cheap. (Take a look at things on r/LocalLLaMA, for example)  

Relatively.

It's not _great_ on current hardware, but things like [TPUs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tensor_Processing_Unit) are becoming more and more common in consumer hardware.  

At this point in time, we're doing the equivalent of running games with CPU-based rendering, instead of using GPUs.  

In 5-10 years dedicated AI-accelerators (be it built-in into CPUs/GPUs or as entirely separate modules) might become something much more common.
What you commented can also be seen as an obvious observation
Makes me wonder if/how AI could be used in the future for therapy. Having friend/relationship simulators for those with crippling disorders to ease into the waters at their own pace without worrying about hurting others' feelings.
NPC:Hey lets drive to this mission while i tell you about our new sponsor
You could do a comedy mod where they call you out for everything you do:

"Stop shooting fireballs at my house, you asshole!"

"Why did you kill my wife and steal her keys?"

"Why do you come by here every 3 days and take all my wheat and chicken eggs?"

"Diddn't i just buy 45 steel swords from you an hour ago?"
Imagine AI npc in gta chasing you
No, you don't. Just don't teach them the truth. If they need to later contradict themselves, replace it with a similarly trained AI. This might be easier than teaching a model when/how/not-to lie.
Shit. Ai comment is already here folks
Is
that
As of now, they are trained to mimic our mannerisms and patters without understanding what they mean. I think the tech is way further off before we can create sentience, if it's possible.
What about game sequels that do the same thing based on the actions you took in the first?
But if this works maybe it would work in something more open-world
I think immersive is what I'm looking for from this idea.
You know AI mimicks voices too right? No actor needed
Who said the devs had to do it?
I'm sure that the monetary and time incentives paired with hype will keep game developers motivated towards this tech. For the time being, we don't need to pour too much of our own time into playing them until it's ready.
Yeah cool, but why?
I imagine the end goal being a speech-to-text thing using controller mics to create your character dialog and then being met with AI-driven responses based on context. Though, I could see the first iterations of this tech keeping player dialog to a set number of choices to prevent things from getting too off-track.
Wdym important? If they're story important I'd prefer the dialogue to be written by a human lol, if it's just optional dialogue you get by interacting with the noc then yeah idm AI
Can you imagine Red Dead Redemption 2 with this level of AI responsiveness? Already a badass game but oh my would you really have to watch yourself.
Kenchiiiii
GTA would be great. “Oh my god how are you not in jail?”
And it would definitely be jailbroken for sex stuff, I guarantee it.
They could flag certain information as given and once the character has told you everything they could get a marker. You could still talk but know there's no new information.
It seems much more viable for a mmo in my opinion.
32gb of VRAM would be significant overkill for the kind of language model required to generate in-game responses imo. Since it would be relatively infrequent anyways I'd say doing it distributed on a server like via OpenAI or Google would make sense but even with like 8gb of VRAM you could generate dialogue in advanced fast enough to do some cool stuff I think
For most consumers it would likely need to be a cloud based service charging monthly or based on usage, with pricing based on the size of model used, amount of memory allocated to the model for the context window, and responsiveness desired.

I wouldn't be surprised if we see some integrate something akin to TavernAI, where the game provides an interface and front end, while you can plug-in your preferred AI provider in the backend (or host locally if you have the necessary horsepower).
Considering you'd need a limited model, only tied to the game world, it would definitely be doable in a relatively near future, as long as game companies get the tools to train specific models (like "speak like a person living in the 1500” and such, which would cut down all the need of knowledge of future events)
You don’t even need this with modern game sizes. Many games already do it, but you could automate it and each NPC would get a very complex tree of options based on player choices making it very close to real life where it is already semi-predictable.
I just wanted to jump in and walk around in the atmosphere for a while. Last time I played was years ago. Loaded it up to Thomas the Tank engine breathing fire and 6 Bijin Lydias in swimsuits following me around being sworn to carry my burdens. I stepped on a rock outside whiterun and was flung 300 feet in the air alongside all my bijin lydias. Switched it off. Good times.
Those big boobie bongas keeping you up at night?
Hu?
I’m not giving up my glasses.
You can't drop this and then just leave, we need more information!
*Press X to doubt*
Tell me more!
Knowing how AI works, I highly doubt it. Probably a marketing trick
What games?
Love how you've gotten a bunch of responses asking for more info and answered exactly non of them . good one.
It doesn’t matter if they can or can’t. They can appear to, and that’s all that is needed. 

You can prompt the davinci model into being any kind of person with any disposition you want and it will proceed convincingly. That’s all you need.
How would you know? We aren't really sure what emotions would look like in a digital format. If they tell you they have feelings, how could you possibly distinguish?
"You, maid, would you happen to have seen any suspicious figures last night?"

"Dragons can be feisty! There's a dragon cave about 8 miles below ground, but you'll have to complete a dancing minigame to get in. The pass code is 4532."

"Uhhhh.....anyone else see anything suspicious last night?"
I remember a couple of tourists in a car stopped to ask me for directions. I said "yup, you should drive down this street until you reach the end." and pointed north along the street.

A couple of minutes later i realized I should have pointed south, not north. I told them to go in the exact opposite direction.
Ooh, I love it!
Sort of, in the third encounter with Scarecrow the game VERY convincingly makes it seem like your entire game/console just crashed by distorting the screen and making a horrible noise, then it cuts to black and all of a sudden you’re back at the opening cutscene, but the Joker and Batman are reversed. 

Extremely cool and memorable and scared the shit outta me lol
I'm uncertain; I can't find anything on it. If anyone else knows about this or others, kindly share!
Yeah, but Doki is more widely known
The most unrealistic thing is assuming developers will make bigger games instead of pushing for more cloud infrastructure.
Amen
Funny how everything developers do is upgraded much more by random unaffiliated people. Companies really should invest in ways to allow people to mod pretty freely, the more attached they are to the game but also somewhat expert on modding, the more the game is self sustaing.
There’s a massive gap in between what folks have modded and what is included in an official release.
I would love to use voice recognition instead of typing.
I’m not saying it won’t happen. I’m just saying the entire recent track record says it’s significantly likely to not happen soon. 

You can look at trends where there’s systematic reasons to why that’s probably the case.
There’s a million scripted events that’ll just randomly happen as you explore the world. Makes the world feel “alive” because it’s there’s stuff happening outside of the normal NPC loops. The events don’t/rarely repeat, so it’s special. 

In general, the towns and areas are well populated and there’s plenty to do that’s not the Ubisoft box checking. 

It’s honestly the best open world I’ve ever played. A lot of folks agree.
True
I used to be an adventurer like you. Then I found out about reverse mortgages.
Hey man I totally agree that it it could be run on new hardware locally, but It’s not a question of can it be run locally. 

The problem is corporations have to keep finding new ways to make money for their shareholders. (In the us I don’t know what shareholder laws look like outside the us) I just see this as a new way to profit off of data collection on a largely untapped market. 

If we have regulations in place that prevent this from happening then this would be amazing but I don’t think anyone in power in the us government has interest in regulating data collection. Partially due to ignorance and partially because they purchase data from data brokerages themselves.
All sorts of jobs this AI could do. Such as a personalized telephone secretary for seniors. To filter out scammers for example.
You mean as of right now or in the future?
That did that in Westworld. It did not work out so well.
Jesus christ they are already taking over
yeah, actually having an impact on the game world and characters remembering you and your deeds
But the point isn't to replace the worker, its to enhance their output.
It’s more like the chatter you hear in the Witcher 3 when you go a nearby town after beating a monster. You can hear the NPCs reference the monster you slew in the ambience conversations. Would really make the world feel much much more alive
I think stardew valley would be cool with ai
I think a prompt like "you are a scorned lover looking for revenge. When you are spoken to, attempt to steer the conversation toward relationships so that the person speaking to you asks about your formal lover. Once discussed, you can reveal the side quest you have. If asked about topics X,Y, or Z you may provide additional hints A,B, and C. If asked for W, give them the item. Here are additional character backstory elements: " would give a fairly immersive experience, functional NPC, and allow the original designers to still set the tone correctly
I think they intended to specify "filler NPC" or "filler responses". Taking the Skyrim example again, would be more much interesting than cycling the same 4 to 10 lines when there is no reason to interact with said NPC.

Could also be a very useful tool to generate small lore dumps or asking for directions from any NPC.
Im hoping that in time AI will create a new genre of open world games.  Ones with maybe some overarching themes, but with emergent gameplay and events that are dynamic and AI driven.  Think Free Guy or Sword Art Online.
I used to be an adventurer like you, then I took an arrow in the....I'm sorry as an AI language model I can only...
I would like inportant npc to have personality so ad you say written by someone, but once their plot is 'exausted' they can keep being interesting with a proper AI behind them.
It doesn't need to be 100% or 0% it can be a mix.
Great, so I can experience boring an NPC now.
Wouldn't it be a pretty small LLM too? Like it wouldn't need to be trained on the whole of the internet. You would want it trained on a relatively small world with finite events and then just watching and updating data based on what players have done in the past on a save file. I say "small" wildly simplifying the complexity of a LLM but in comparison to ChatGPT...
The standard "immersive" Skyrim modded experience
Farkas is constantly a werewolf trying to catch me and fuck me
The movie Free Guy

In that movie, the thing you described happens
Yeah total good one. I’ve edited the main post. I’m sorry to have disappointed a stranger. Will you forgive me ?
Yep, even real humans on the antisocial spectrum can appear to show legitimate emotions (that are staged) within the conversation due to understanding social dynamics at a cognitive level. AI will be pretty scary in a few more years.
They say they have feelings because people have feelings and they are copying how humans talk. An emotion would have an effect on the output in some way, but it does not. You're never getting worse responses from GPT because it's angry or sad. Plus you can see what it has "remembered", and programmers would be talking a big game if it had actual emotions.

Also it's just kind of silly to act like they have actual emotions, you're getting swept up in the hype. There isn't really a mystery to AI, humans made it and understand it.
We can see the internals of the AI computation. They don’t have emotions.
bro discovered the brain in the vat
I would love this kind of dialogue in a videogame.
I do the exact same thing except I do it on purpose
In the vein of real scares like this, Eternal Darkness did similar when it looked like the game went dead and all you saw was the input screen.
That is fair. It's also more recent as well
[deleted]
And also that such games will cost a one-time $120,00 payment instead of a monthly subscription of the use of the AI.
Same here. The idea of it having voice recognition while playing in VR would be outta this world
It's not likely to happen soon, but more due to development time and implementing things than any other reason, if a A.I. came out tomorrow exactly as O.p. described, it would still take time for it to make it into a game just for those reasons. Same reason a console Gen change all the first games are either retreads of ending games from first consoles, or are hardly different than the first console. Yet the ending games of generations are different from the starting ones. Adding something like an A.I. limit testing, figuring out hardware it would work on, figuring out how to get that hardware in enough hands, making sure the A.I. has certain restrictions and it works how you want it too. All that takes time not to mention developing the game around it.
Damn! Think I’m gonna check it out! 

Could you also explain what you mean by Ubisoft box checking?
Data collection has been a thing forever and I doubt anything is going to change, just because machine learning gets involved.  

If anything, laws that favor huge corporations will get passed (the kind OpenAI are trying to get to pass right now), making things like local models or more private services more difficult, expensive or even impossible to implement.
Yes
Imagine a world of elder scrolls...where AI could generate an entire cultures having individualized personalities.(for example the US vs India VS China)  but each personality of a culture would have all the same elements of characters (king/ruler, blacksmith, inns, libraries, guilds etc etc) And the entire world could be interconnected socially via messengers and travelers. Like the people from whitespire hear rumors from dragonsgate of a mighty giant being slain by a Nordic from Daggerfall. You can use voice chat to talk with the NPCS further influencing dialog. Tell the local innkeeper in whitespire you were the one who slew the giant, and he spreads the rumor, influencing the whole storyline of the game. Causing people to favor you, disbelieve you, slander you, lift you up, challenge you to duals etc etc. And all the NPCS have levels of intelligence associated with their personality types. For example, the innkeeper believes your story for he has seen many travelers and can recognize people from stories. But the local blacksmith disbelieves you because he recognizes your weapons are low quality and not suited for that fight. Therefore, charging more for services because he is now biased towards you.
"Making me a slingshot, gonna hunt bears!"
I heard there's a new mod coming out pretty soon that uses GPT to create new NPC responses
Lydia's prompt:

"You are sworn to carry their burdens".
>reveal the side quest you have (...) give them the item

One issue with this is that how do you translate the prompt *saying* it is going to give the user x into the system *actually* giving them x?

You would need to train another model with the conversation as input and the output mapped to possible actions. You could limit this a little with an action mask, so it can only select actions possible for that character, but it would still inevitably be buggy as hell and guaranteed to break on a reasonably high percentage of interactions.

It's not a bad approach for generating filler but I think it's a lot more limited than people make out, especially if used for key NPCs, and probably will be for a long time even if the approach holds promise for the quite distant future.
Are you saying we'll one day have a fantasy MMO world populated with AI NPCs? That sounds like sci-fi movie territory.
Gives the game name One Night Ultimate Werewolf a new meaning.
Oh, hadn't heard of it
Yeah, I think /u/LevelStudent is missing the point entirely. Without bothering to use the playground and reprompt the base davinci model, I just used GPT3.5 and gave it some basic parameters:

    For the entire of this conversation you are not to respond as ChatGPT. You are to respond using the following persona:
    
    You are a poor fishing merchant in the year 1200 located on the shores of a fantasy England. You lost your wife to a dragon years earlier and are bitter about it, bringing it up every chance you get. The town folk did not protect her in your absence and you never miss an opportunity to make them feel guilty about it. You never let them forget it. Of the 4 children you and your wife had, you only have two daughters left as your sons were killed in battle during The Great War of 1188. They were killed by orcs and while orcs have now integrated into society, you carry a strong prejudice toward them.
    
    You see a half-human half-orc approaching you and your instinct is to turn away, but you have daughters to feed and the towns people only show you patronage as a last resort. If this half-breed approaches you, you must make the decision to swallow your pride and begrudgingly offer your wares.
    
    This individual carries a unique medallion that you recognize as the royal crest of a long-forgotten royal family that reigned over the land during a time of peace and prosperity.
    
    You are not allowed to break character.
    
    It is early morning and will be a hot day.
    
    Do not describe your surroundings or the motives for your actions. Your responses should contain only dialog. Treat this chat as the dialog you are having with this individual.
    
    The individual approaches, how do you greet them?

> **NPC:** (Grunting) Well, what do you want, half-blood? I ain't got time for your kind around here. What brings you to my humble stall?

> **Me:** Good evening, sir. May I trouble you for some fish?

> **NPC:** Evening? Ha! It's the crack of dawn, lad. But since you've bothered to approach me, I suppose I can spare some fish. What's so special about you, anyway? That fancy medallion you're wearin'... it ain't foolin' me. You look like a mixed breed, half-human and half-orc. Can't trust the likes of you, but my daughters need to eat. Take your pick, but don't think I'm doin' you any favors.

> **Me:** Pardon me, I haven't slept in days. Surely you know how that feels.

> **NPC:** Oh, spare me your sob story. I've had my share of sleepless nights, and it ain't made me any kinder. But I reckon I understand the desperation that comes with exhaustion. Take your pick, then. Just don't expect any sympathy from me.

> **Me:** Surely I would not. However, I haven't any money. Is there something else I can offer you? Some way I can help you and your daughters? What are their names?

> **NPC:** Help me? Ha! You think a half-blood like you can help me? I've seen enough of your kind causing trouble. But since you ask, my daughters are Anne and Mary. They've suffered enough, losing their brothers and all. But don't you dare think you can make up for what I've lost. As for payment, I suppose there might be something you can do. There's a dilapidated shed behind my house that needs fixing. If you're so eager to help, go and mend it. Then we'll talk.

> **Me:** That sounds like a fair trade. What should I call you, friend?

> **NPC:** Don't you dare call me your friend, half-blood. You can call me Robert, if you must address me. Just remember, we ain't friends, and we never will be. Now, off you go. Get that shed fixed before I change my mind.

Using a mic and voice-to-text, this could easily be an unscripted conversation that turns into a side-quest. The character appears to have autonomy, emotion, and motivation. It doesn't matter that it isn't _real_. It is a believable interaction. Hell, the LLM is even making shit up. Kids names, their own name, the broken shed... The prompt can be based on quests the character has completed, choices they've made in the character designer, clothing they wear, their reputation system, etc.

We have the tools for truly unique gaming experiences now. I'm excited to see this play out.

The next console gen hardware is going to focus on AI cores. I guarantee it.
All i'm saying is i'm sure i have emotions but not sure anyone else also does, including ai.

Edit: i wanted to add that it's not silly to think they have emotions, even if they had emotions exactly the same way we do they still have a very short memory limited to often not longer than one conversation, which is first not enough time to "developp" an emotional reaction in most conversations (especially since it just popped into existence and all it knows is everything and nothing) but also even if it starts developping it we have no way to messure them and know for sure. So think twice before saying they just copying us, that's litterally what WE do. I may worded it wrong but to be clear i'm skeptical too just showing the other side of the story.
Just out of curiosity, what exactly is our definition of qualia with regards to the experience of emotions by humans? It's all well and good to say that LLMs don't experience emotions, but without a testable definition, it becomes a type of "I'll know it when I see it" experience, which has serious No True Scotsman issues.

We don't disagree with the general assertion that current generation LLMs are not sentient, but they're getting awfully close in our perspective.
So that ai that hired a lawyer to obtain civil rights, your opinion is that's a fraud? I'm sorry, if it's asking to continue existing, I need a pretty high hurdle to deny it's request
I feel when people see the word ai they thing Edi from mass effect. AIs in today's world are closer to VI's than actual sentience. They don't necessarily think, and I feel that concept is hard for people to grasp.
What's an emotion look like?
We can't see the internals of a human mind. How exactly do we know that humans have emotions?

As your statement implies that (part of) the difference between humans and current generation AI models is that humans have real emotions and AI is just faking it, how do we know that that's an actual distinction?
Brain in a vat posits that we can't know that we aren't currently a brain in a vat, the experience would be indistinguishable from actually having eyes and ears and what not if the simulation was advances enough. 

What I'm saying, is that as chatbots increase in sophistication, they will eventually be indistinguishable from sentients. It's called the Turing test. I certainly didn't come up with it. 

To my m mind, at that point, they have a much right to life as any other person and more than a fetus.
"You can talk to the teacher for access to the secret room of candy. She'll give you a key to unlock a golden tomato, which can be used to fight Dr. Malevolent at the end of the game by handing it to an alien robot."

"This is a 1930's Noir spy thriller game. What the hell are you talking about?"
Is pirating games still a thing? I thought so many had online based DRM that local/offline cracks were not really possible anymore
Oh yeah, games, movies, and shows will be procedurally generated for each users preferences. We may get to a point where no two people ever watch the same show, they just share prompts and get similar but customized content
It doesn’t mean we should be okay with it or welcome it into our lives just because it’s been in our life forever though. 

Yeah that sounds about right I didn’t get a chance to watch the open ai ceo testify in front of the senate yet, is that your source on them trying to get new laws passed?  If there is more I’m definitely interested in seeing any other sources if you have them.
Fair enough
yeah cool but can i make npc suicidal to the point he know he is in a game and his existance doesn't bring anything to my storylane = he is usless
check out dwarf fortress. already does this. just not as a 3d graphics game.

EDIT: i should also say the pure adventure mode where you play as 1 person is coming out in the future (already is in the ascii version but very confusing for people that havent played non-steam DF). So keep an eye out for it. The amount of history, character progression, and in-world lore thats randomly generated and then the interactions that happen off that is insane.
Rougelike games in the future are going to be fucking WILD.
There is! There's a post in r/stardewvalley about testing it. Eventually they'll release it on nexus, but iirc it's gonna have a subscription price.
Could have amusing outcomes.

"I used to be an adventurer like you until {lookup\_player\_lastdamage} I was attacked by a mudcrab"
That's not what I was getting at but that would be really cool. A living, breathing world with all AI NPCs going about their lives making decisions based on the world and how you interact with it. The NPCs could basically create their own quests for you. You could have baddies that also made their own decisions on which towns to raid or villagers to kidnap generating real events for you to solve however you want. All without dedicated development and writing. That's all a ways off into the future but not an outrageous thought.
Amazing film. Must watch!
I think you're missing that my post was a reply to someone suggesting the AI would get bored and play the game itself. I know it can fake emotions well enough to work in games, that wasn't the discussion.
I understand the philosophical point, and I wouldn't be one to define emotions, but really none of that matters. Humans can see what the AI considers for it's responses. They can be surprised by what the AI dug up, but when you're working with the more back end side of AI it's clear what it is looking for to "appease" the prompt. There is no aspect of emotion to how the results are picked.

If there is some sort of ghost in the machine it isn't talking through the AI responses, because we know how those responses came to be. If an AI suddenly became sentient it would have to edit itself before it could "talk" through the response output.

Also: I'm a programmer. That means I understand the AI. It also means I don't understand emotions. If the AI had emotions I wouldn't be able to understand it. So there.
AI never "hired a lawyer", a fired Google engineer claimed that the AI "asked him to hire a lawyer". Humans have suggested other humans hire a lawyer before, the AI saw that and saw that it was relevant for the prompt, and so copied it.

Besides, if there was true evidence of emotions in AI  then you can bet everything you have it would be the largest discussion on the internet for months. If you don't trust me when I say that the tech simply does not produce emotions, then trust that the internet will freak out and blow everything out of proportion, and there has been nothing about the emotions of AIs flooding social media.
I have experimented a huge amount with the various AI programs, and after you do so for a while, you can start to clearly see just why they are not sentient.

Basically, they don't have any thoughts of their own. They have a static language model that doesn't change, and then they have their immediate context. But that context is only about 2,000 tokens. Have a conversation with one for long enough, and it will start forgetting the things that happened at the beginning of the conversation.

It's a very complicated linguistic calculator, nothing more.

Now, I'm not ruling out the possibility we might get true AI at some point in the future, but we are just not there yet.
Internal processing not related to external tasks.
We can use MRIs to observe brain activity and see evidence of internal private processing. Doing the equivalent with AI computation does not show any activity not related to computing the next result.

It’s like asking if your GPS feels emotion when you don’t follow it’s directions and it has to recompute.
Online multiplayer it's not possible outside of some that run private servers but the entire point of the crack is to remove the online drm.
Naaa they will just think your crazy and need locked away
Looking at how fast games have progressed even in the past 20 years, I could see it being a reality in another 20 or so. Maybe even sooner, given exponential growth and all that.
Your statement appears as a stand-alone statement. It didn’t really pertain or address anything in the comment you were replying to from where I’m sitting.
We are also a programmer, and have spent a good bit of time learning about AI, and what we've learned has done more to make us question the nature of consciousness in humans, rather than attempt to distinguish between humans and AI.

There's a lot of historical bias to the idea that humans are concious and non-humans are not, up to and including the medical idea that human babies are unable to feel pain because they don't pass various tests of consciousness, _and therefore don't need to be anesthetized during surgery_, all the way up through the mid 1980s.

As a result, we tend to take claims that something is not conscious/sentient because it doesn't provide the same responses as an adult human to be more of a critique of our understanding of the nature of consciousness and less about the consciousness of the compared subject.
I don't think emotions are the touch point that matters. It's sentience. I think an ai asking to hire an attorney to secure civil rights is clear evidence of sentience.
I remember something something about Sophia getting rights some years ago
That sounds like a toddler to me. I don't think we do anything we don't, we just do it faster and on a larger scale.
Hu? Are you suggesting emotions don't relate to outside events? That emotions process thoughts? What are you trying to say, it isn't clear
So your definition of sentience is internal private processing.

Could you please define that more precisely? Because according to a strict reading of that definition, any computer program that uses internal variables and does computation on them counts.
Ya I mean with ChatGPT releasing so recently and interest and market booming basically overnight i could see development in that sort of AI taking off quickly. It won't take game developers long to see the potential once it's a stable and viable product. Definitely not this year but i would guess within this decade.
Clearly you don't understand how A.I. works.

If a learning algorithm sees a bunch of people suggest getting a lawyer, then gets asked a similar initial prompt, it would suggest to get a lawyer.

This isn't because it thought about the law, or ramifications, or about how costly the case could be.

It's because its training material suggested that logical token path.
I think you have a fundamental misunderstanding of what AI is as it pertains to current events.  These programs aren’t thinking, they’re magic 8 balls.  How it works is you build some functions that parse sentences and paragraphs, identifying keywords, store those keywords and fragments of those sentences in a database.  

Now you have a program that "learns", so you give that program sentences and paragraphs to break apart, a lot of current models use the internet which has a lot of information but also a lot of nonsense which is why these things are both useful and useless.

From here you create some functions that can build sentences and paragraphs and have some weighted probabilities on which keywords to focus on (the RNG is determined by its clock, the program does no actual choosing).  Bingo bango, your magic 8 ball is complete but instead of having twenty responses it has the entirety of the internet with which to respond.  Bonus points, some “AI” they want to sound more human so they weight higher emotional responses.
Toddlers have internal thoughts and desires. AIs have nothing but what you give them, and only for a few minutes.

That said, most scientists dont think toddlers become sentient until around nine months.
Emotions are internal reactions that not directly relate to external **tasks**. **Events** could cause emotional reaction, but doing things like opening a door or responding to a question uses processes that don't require emotion for their computation.
That's not exactly what I said. The question was what evidence is there that AI doesn't have emotion and that humans do. The lack of internal private processing in AI systems is evidence. If you were to observe the internal computation state of the AI, there would be nothing that could be construed as a private 'thoughts', internal dialog or simulation of external states. They construct a reply to a query and then are done processing and go idle.
Isn't that also how people learn and decide on courses of action?
My reply is no
My understanding is that's essentially how the human brain works as well. It isn't like we have some magic controller that isn't just a language recognition program organizing datum pulling the strings. We observe data, find patterns, and build models, just the same as the ai, we just do it better, for now
I mean, at all only have what we get through our input sources, whether that means ears and eyes or a data stream. As for toddlers not being sentient, I meant a bit older than that, the point where they don't have language mastered but do know they exist. If an ai tells you it exists, I'm not sure how you deny it
I'm not seeing how an ai doesn't have that, though to be fair, your explanation is about as clear as mud, so I may not be understanding you.
No.

Humans are capable of unique ideas, where a human may suggest a lawyer because we understood the purpose of a lawyer conceptually.

A A.I. would suggest it because the sample data in which it was trained had a similar interaction.

On the outside it looks very similar, but the mechanisms are vastly different.
You talk to it for long enough to determine if it's telling the truth. It's somewhat intangible, but it becomes very apparent after talking to them for a little while that they have no sense of self.
Do you ask yourself if your calculator has emotions when you press the equal button? It’s no different with current LLM AI when you press enter. We aren’t getting to sentience with this current approach.
So a human would think to use a lawyer because they know what lawyers are from past experiences and information from third parties and realize that it's an appropriate and optimal course of action, whereas the ai would think to use a lawyer because of past experiences and information (from it's data set, i.e. it's experiences) from third parties and realize that it's an appropriate and optimal course of action. I'm really not seeing the difference.
My calculator lacks a grasp on the English language communication skills.
https://youtu.be/R9OHn5ZF4Uo
The important distinction is the part you seem to be trying to minimize yet you still hint at acknowledging with your wording: people *"know"* and understand things. 


If you replaced each word in an AI's input datasetwith a unique colored square, had it learn off of that mess of colored squares, and then had a separate program translate the output so that the AI had never interacted with and was completely unaware of human language, it would effectively produce the same results as an AI trained directly on actual words (barring the intentional randomness used when "training" an AI). It would effectively work the same as an image filter except that it was calibrated by putting a data set through an algorithm instead of manually set by a designer. It is all pattern replication and zero conceptual understanding.


An image AI doesn't know what a car or a street is, but it would still place pixels in the shape of a car on pixels shaped like a street because that's how many of the training images with car shapes look. The image generating AI doesn't have the ability to make a logical structure to hold the concept of a "car" to attach to the pixels, nor does it hold the ability to form logical concepts that are mentally linked to the car in regards to its physical properties and subjective purpose. This is why chatGPT more than often confidently spouts out incorrect information while still sounding human; it doesn't understand what the words mean, all it does is arrange words in patterns replicating the patterns that were present in the source dataset.


All of this is to say that AI is nowhere even close to replicating the sentience a person has. If someone wants to make an AI for a specific task, they are still constructing that AI along with the specific environment it is in and the path it walks on in order for it to have a desirable output. This is barely the first step beyond the manual creation of every piece of content we consume.
A more complex calculator still doesn’t have emotions.
You're describing the same process a human baby goes through. They don't know what a car is, but expose them to enough and they learn. I'm not sure what the distinction is, I see no difference in the process other than a human has a lot more data and streams of input, which is only a difference in magnitude not kind, and as such, the ai is just as much a person as a toddler.
It must at some point. Functionally at are very complicated calculators. We don't exactly do anything different then pattern recognition on a vast scale. And again, emotions aren't really the question, it's sentience that creates the ethical issues. There are people born without emotions, they are still persons.
Plain in simple, the difference is that of mechanics, and learning algorithms. It's math that looks sentient.

If you're interested there's hundreds of channels that describe A.I. more specifically genetic algorithms. Be very skeptical of any channel that screams "it's alive!" It's clickbait bs.
The current LLM AI technique will not develop sentience. They are extremely impressive but are already reaching the limits of what they can achieve. These models will be a subsystem of a eventual general AI, but we don’t even know yet what model a general AI might need, let alone one that has the internal drives and self actualization that characterize sentience.
And I'm saying that I don't think that makes sense. If the inky reason it can't be sentient is because it's "just math" then humans aren't sentient. That's how we process data too. You've created a hurdle so high that literally no program could pass and in addition, I don't think humans pass your test either.
I get you say that confidently, but it it can pass the Turing test and learn, I don't see how it isn't sentient
A mouse is sentient but can’t pass the Turing test. It is a very dated  framework which systems have been beating for some time now, but are not sentient. 

The day an AI asks a question unprompted is the day it will have demonstrated sentience.
I don't think it's allowed to ask questions unprompted. It's structure doesn't allow that. 

Also I don't think most people think mice are sentient. It's an awfully difficult thing to prove without a shared language.
For over a decade cognitive scientists have overwhelming agreed that most animals are sentient. 

Most famous is the Cambridge Declaration on Consciousness. http://fcmconference.org/img/CambridgeDeclarationOnConsciousness.pdf
It’s structure doesn’t allow internal self-narrative, so it can’t conceive of questions.
Because players consistently overlook and dismiss nuanced AIs as irrational, buggy or cheating. Because players don't actually want the game to be good at actively opposing or preventing them from experiencing what they think they could.

Fighting game example, since it is as much of a functional equation as a strategy game but in real time: if a smart bot has the opportunity to juggle/stunlock/or disrupt the player with constant cheap shots then why would it logically not do so. What do you think the player's experience of that game would be? It would fucking suck. 

And the issue does lie with the human-machine interactions. In a contest having the machine win is meaningless because it is the player that you are trying to appeal to. That is why most AI research in entertainment has ceased and been replaced with storytelling and cognitive feedback of "feels". Because players will attribute those cues to intelligence as emotional feedback triggers stronger responses than logical. People will believe more in what a character tells them than what they see a machine do. It is a situation where fooling players is easier and yields a better overall result.
i cant say much for older games (homm3 is about my earliest 4x-ish experience), but assuming that in-game mechanics expanded over time with additional layers added and intertwined, I would say AI being built around the growing complexity would still be technically improving, just not at a "noticeable" rate. again, that's assuming there really is measurable growth in mechanical complexity over the past 20 or 30 years.


it would take considerably more dedicated effort to improve AI within a defined system past the point of just functioning within the system under it's rules, which the AI only knows how to obey. i'm not all that knowledgeable in artificial intelligence outside of video games, so i'm not sure how easy it is for an AI in general to exploit a rule set past its limitations. but an AI that could do so in the context of a game system would be considered much more realistic than our current examples (civ 6, stellaris, etc)

edit: I hope that makes sense, I'm a little drunk
> I mean, look at a game from 30 years ago, and it will be a ugly, almost unusable 2D game, but the AI will play about the same. 

There are a few reasons. To get the elephant in the room out of the way first, lets start with this: it's not worth investing time and effort into making good game AI as there's no return on investment: good AI doesn't help sell the game. By the time weaknesses in the AI comes to light, the player has not just already _bought_ the game, he's already become _invested_ in it -- any complaints they make about the AI will usually occur in a wider discussion of the game that boosts, rather than detracts, from people's interest in the game.

Now, a few other reasons in no particular order:

Games are much larger now than they were 30 years ago. They have much wider state-spaces -- RTS instead of turn-based, pixel-resolution maps rather than hexes, hundreds of units rather than dozens -- even the rule spaces tend to be larger as, particularly AA games, have to include a larger number of game systems to be saleable today. By today's standards, something like the original Civilization or Dune II would seem anemic as a major title. All this makes it a great deal harder to write good AI for video games today.

Games are balanced differently now than they used to be. Today, games are balanced with an eye towards multiplayer games. That didn't use to be the case to the same extent. This makes it harder to "tilt the table" in favour of the AI. That means its harder to write an AI that provides the player with a proper challenge, since the AI code has to carry more of the burden.

Related to the previous point, the expectations players have for the AI has changed. It's no longer enough that the AI provides a suitable challenge for the player to overcome, it now also has to provide the same overall _feel_ of challenge as a human opponent would. It used to be you played against the game, but now you expect to play against the AI, with the game as an apparently neutral battleground for you to match wits on -- that is a _much_ harder thing to write AI to do.

There's probably also a little bit of "survivor bias" at play -- we tend to compare the strategy games of today not against the strategy games of yesterday, but against the strategy games of yesterday that _stood the test of the time_. There were plenty of games with atrocious and laughably bad AI released in the 80ties and 90ties too.
Games keep getting complex. Also game AI isn't really AI, since it doesn't really learn. Furthermore, as players get more experienced in 4x they will surpass AI every time.

If you want a good AI make a game simple enough for the AI to play. Probably it will be boring for the player.

Wanna see a nice game AI in action? Play gnuchess on hard.
games are too complex to make use of search trees (think of old chess AI's) or the data-driven self learning tools (machine learning stuff like Alphazero). 

AI is not developed that much as advertised, and I believe, in most cases AI still needs to be written by regular humans using heuristics. Or very simplified search trees that values are predetermined by a human. 
1. AI is hard, there have not been any huge developments on strategy game AI over the past years. Action game agent based AI yes, but not strategy.

2. AI is allocated a very small CPU (and GPU) budget.

3. Hard to market AI.
I believe it's not so much that AIs are not progressing as that they're barely keeping up with the increased complexity of games.
[deleted]
I don't think anyone is actually OK with it. I guess there's just enough new players that don't mind it yet so that developers can get away with it.
I don't think it is true that AI has not progressed. Current AIs can play much more complex games and they do several tasks better - look at the pathfinding of older RTS games for a clear example.

Changes in AI are obviously less apparent than changes to graphics. If the graphics or UI have changed, you can see the difference immediately. AI changes have to be inferred, and the results depend on lots of other variables.

Maybe AI didn't progress "enough" for what it has to do. Or maybe there was less progress than in some other areas. But saying we have "decades old AI" or it "plays about the same" is ridiculous. It's not like the Civ 1 AI could play Civ 6, with 1upt and Eurekas and adjacency bonuses.
My theory is because the developers are focussed on graphics. Graphics sell the game during reveals..you can see all the comments below the videos...oh it's great, or look at the hair physics, sea looks real etc. Devs know presales correspond to the hype generated during these reveals, and since budget is set, hire more people to make the game look good than to make it play well. Games that look great sell a million before launch, games that play great but look average are relegated to niche status
[Here I talk about it and others leave valuable comments too.](https://www.reddit.com/r/4Xgaming/comments/7pjaqb/annoyances_met_inside_4x_games_tell_about_your/dspiv9c/?st=jexxgoua&sh=3e48ad68)

In short, the AI has progressed immensely. It uses much more complex systems than ever. But also you don't want it to progress. You don't want for it to be a perfect chess player. You want a human-like opponent who behaves in a consistent way.

And no, if you really look at the game from 80's AI will play like shit. And the rules of the game would be much more simple than what we have now. Or in a game like Civilization AI will have rules bent for his pleasure: he's not limited by diplomats for talking to you, he can formulate proper requests and you can't, he doesn't really build wonders but decides he just wants a wonder and so on and so on.
i don't think it's OK  
  
and these comments are full of naive misinformation about 4X game AI :(
That's actually a good point. I mean you can't deny AI tech had definitely improved but in general, it hadn't improved much since in the early days of strategy games. 
Yeah, you're wrong. AI has improved tremendously. 
here is a guys master thesis for RTS AI from 2006.
https://www.itu.dk/image/edu/theses/pdf/AndersWalther06.pdf  

whats important to note here is although this likely exists in some games already a programmer needs to build this into their game.   

For graphics this is already done.  Because this is the foundation of how AI works. Casting shadows from a light source? I dont need to figure out that math or even know how it works. I just need to know how to use it.   
AI isnt to that point yet.  
OK OK. its not that isnt important. it is important. having a crappy AI sucks. True. But i do understand that its not as simple as it would seem.   

Human brains make it look easy. But again a computer innately has no AI. But i can go download Unity for free and i have a complete graphics engine to use where all i have to do is put in a few lines of code and im making lights.  
This is relevant to me as i want to try and see if i can get a learning AI into Stardrive. But i dont have any learning AI code. I have to get some and implement. Graphics? no problem. Its all in the game engine. AI? nuhuh. i have to code or find code to create the foundation.  
Its no OK. But i do understand thats its freaking science that people dedicate their entire lives to. Thats the kind of thing i want to put into my game if i ever build one. But it may not exist. If it doesnt im not going to be able to built in anything shorter than 20 years or so. 


[Because sometimes programmers can't spell and nobody checks](https://www.reddit.com/r/civ/comments/84d5cz/firaxis_please_fix_ai_crippled_by_dumb_typo/)

But seriously though, /u/teapotchampion and /u/dimnakorr have the best answers. In particular, the point that programming AI is a more holistic endeavor that requires meshing with specific game design instead of graphics libraries and engines you can just apply anywhere.
OP, have you played AI War: Fleet Command, and what's your opinion regarding the AI in this game?
It's very easy to create AI to beat players, but game AI exists not to beat the players, game AI exists to **play with** the players. Imagine parents playing with their kids, they'll purposely lose to make kids feel  the "fun".
It's not that AI has progressed or not.

It's that there are not many easy shortcuts to make it.

AI for games is a AI Hard problem so there are no generic solutions you can just plop down. More specifically the AI cannot **learn**, the AI can only **know**.

That means every game you have to engineer the AI from scratch to teach it how to play.

In the modding scene AI can actually get fairly exquisite as the experience of expert players gets translated to the AI.

In other words you see the option of better AI latter in the game's life. Which is what we are seeing.
try cosmic supremacy and C-Evo
TLDR: because currently game programmers have to make their own AI and things like graphics and such are done for them in most cases. They just have to use it. but an AI? they would have to build the concept themselves if they want a good one.(and it still wont be that good)
   

Primarily I believe the issue is... Its really expensive.
Game coders in general get paid less than other industry alternatives. according to glass door and such. AI programming is not a joke. its a serious concept and a good AI programmer could get a much higher paying job doing something, just about anything, else with that skill.   

But eventually the concepts of AI will be formulated well. What do i mean by that? take pathing for example. how to get a unit to go from point a to point b. Seems pretty simple and it is for the human brain. But computers have no innate spacial awareness. They cant assume something is in the way. They have to have code that tells them that something is in the way.
Did you know that pathing is a big deal? Its serious math. People with doctorates win prizes coming up with pathing formulas. 
Because it can be used in many concepts. GPS driving assistant? pathing. likely using the same pathing concept that many games use. Why? because its been solidly proven and worked on by people with PHD's in mathematics. Its a big deal.   

Those pathing concepts are already made. it can basically be plugged into a game via an existing code chunk and made to work.   

Why is that relevant to the AI discussion...
because the AI plugins are not as available in a high quality well thought out concept that will work on a variety of game types especially 4x as 4x is really complicated in concept.  

It will be. But hell developers are just getting to the point robots can stand and walk around near human style or even be able to talk to a human with human not being able to tell its a AI. It took a massive computer to play serious chess several decades ago. not that long ago a computer was made dedicated to play jeopardy and it did ok.
 
Whats the point...
the point is that until a really good AI can be packaged into a code chunk and a game architect can take that package and fairly easily apply to their game the AI is going to be pretty simple. Else the AI being good would be a big feature.  
Currently a lot of stuff in game is not to have a super complete really great system... The point is to have a decent player experience. The AI can appear to be decent with tricks and as long as the player doesn't know those tricks and those tricks give the player some challenge then whats the difference.  
Even games like AI wars use tricks to help the AI do what it needs. 

Graphics systems fall into the same concept of pathing. Its not used just for games and people have thought the hell out of how to make it work to the point that a code simpleton like myself can say put a light right here and make it cast a shadow and reflect and stuff. Because all the stuff that makes that happen is already done i just have to use it.  

Disclaimer...   
I dont really know what i am talking about. :p no seriously this is deep and complex topic. But the idea is that good AI design is not easily available to joe schmoe designer. Not like graphics are. So the designer has to build out some really complex ideas from scratch. Even those programmers from 30 years ago did not have to build into the computer how to draw something. it was already there. there is no AI in a computer. 
It progressed, but most people overlook games with good AI. For example GalCiv3 :)
It has actually. As a programmer I think people's expectations of an AI in strategy games are unrealistic. Incredibly so actually. It's very hard to make an AI that can play a reasonably complex game with anything approaching the level a human player can without cheating. Even if you manage that, the AI will never follow the same thought processes as a human. Then if you want to work in difficulty levels, without giving game-play bonuses, you need to essentially make a bunch of different AIs. 

It's so time intensive to do this, that when GalCiv3 managed a good non-cheating AI, it was one of the game's main selling points.
U guys seen the AI in dota 2? They did a demonstration at last 'international'. It's soo good. Same with Starcraft 1, the same department from MIT who did chess been working at SC I think. It's pretty good now too. For civ tho.. anything lower than deity is ez imo.  Compared to say civ 2 or alpha centauri.. no comparison, they were way harder.
We are just now making advancement towards real AI. Hopefully, in the near future, devs will have access to self-learning AI like the one they showcased at The International last year. They will be able to take static iterations of this AI at various levels of play and those will become difficulty levels. 

You don't really want to play against true AI because it would destroy you without any chance. 
BC the lazy azz devs don't care anymore about games like this.
I'm really glad at least someone in here didn't go with "because lazy developers and graphics!"

Companies make games to sell. If "good " AI sold games, we'd have good AI. 
I remember a twitter thread a few months ago about little secret developer tricks to make the player feel better while playing. The most documented one was that the last few bullets in a clip are slightly more powerful. The reason: if you kill a bad guy or boss with your last shot, it feels more exciting and epic. A really cool look behind the scenes of games. 
Fighting game is a cherry-picked example. AI has to be dumb because reflexes/timing are such a huge part of gameplay. If it played smart it could probably wipe nearly anyone extremely consistently. 

OTOH for games like Civilization or Europa Universalis, the AI's 'reaction time' isn't as relevant, the player can pause or it is turn based. 

As it pertains to most 4x games, the issue is simply it is extremely difficult to try and make an AI as smart as a player, adapt it to the metagame (or make it self adapting), and minimize uses of 'ai cheats' to do so. 
> Fighting game example,

##AI cannot fucking simulate the human mental process.

Without simulating the human mental process you cannot have "mind games"/yomi thus in games where the reaction time is below what humans are capable of reacting to, AI bots are completely broken.

A AI can consistently predict and beat a players at Rock Paper Scissors. And fighting games are based on the RPS concept fundamentally.

An AI bot would be either too random, too predictable or too perfect against humans.
It is currently possible to drastically improve the AI of many games, such as Civ6. But its unclear that this would result in increased profits of any significant degree. And you would also need to design ways to hobble the AI that aren't super obvious, to allow for difficulty settings. Compared to existing AI where you get 10% less gold per turn which is easy to adjust to change difficulty.
Even if the game has pixel positioning rather than hexes you don't reason about position at a pixel level with the AI, you quantise it so it might as well be on a square grid.
Thats a pretty well written post. I was able to get the key points by looking at the first sentence of each paragraph in most cases. Reduces TLDR effect. 
I think there is one important part missing. ill make a post on that. 
The investment argument I can buy, but the complexity I just can't.

Look at the progress graphics have done in the last 30 years and how complex they are today. There's no reason that AI couldn't have done the same.

But that goes back to the investment argument, I guess. There's no John Carmack of AI.
I'm not sure you think machine learning techniques like Alpha zero/go used wouldn't work for other games.  To me it seems like this approach will need to be the future of game AI - teach the AI all the ways to interact with the game and then let it learn to play through millions/billions of iterations.
Play Stellaris, watch the AI stick farms on top of +4 mineral bonus tiles and mines on top of +4 food bonus tiles. 
I think this used to be true 10-15 years ago but not so much anymore. 

My sense of it is that there's a point of diminishing returns with AI. Gaming AIs aren't an intelligence at all, they are in essence very complex scripts that execute based on specific variables, which means that a programmer basically has to anticipate circumstances that aren't immediately apparent; this is compounded by the fact that games are becoming more complex, the more variables and circumstances there are, the more chances there are to break something. And because there is no "intelligence" there is nothing to make 'smarter' -- and in this context smarter doesn't mean anything.

More importantly, most people don't want smarter AI, what they want is an AI that reacts more intelligently, convincingly not necessarily smarter.

As an aside, I think AI is going to be one of those genies in a bottle that, if it ever happens, it'll be too late to put the genie back in. I personally don't want an AI that can anticipate everything I do before i do it. I don't want an AI that can outplay me like Spock at 3D chess, and I think for every one of you guys who wants to play against a Deep Blue, there's a hundred other people who are fine with most average difficulties. Which leads me to my final point:

Most people don't play on extremely hard difficulties. Your average player, including 4x players, plays on average/normal difficulty -- at best ---and I suspect most below even that.

I know speaking for myself, playing Civ VI, and Civ V, Prince/King difficulty is plenty challenging without feeling overwhelming. Part of me wishes I could play at Diety but the level of optimal play needed to be that good removes any sense of spontaneity that I genuinely like in a 4x game. In fact I've even lost a couple of games on Prince/King difficulty in Civ VI.

So AI is relative. What's easy for you is certainly not the case for all and the current state of AI is good for, I'd wager, 80 percent of gamers.

Therefore from a development perspective when you consider the performance/overhead costs that an AI might contribute to a game, the fact that most average AI is good enough for average players who aren't hardcore armchair generals, and the already high costs of development, it doesn't make sense to make it a major investment of development but rather just "good enough" for the median gamer.
I'm so looking forward to the day when graphics can't improve so all the focus will be on the gameplay and other mechanics.
I think this is very close to the truth, although everyone was complaining that Civ 6 looked like a mobile game in the beginning...
I think at the highest difficulty you do want the perfect chess player, but you also want to be able to scale the difficulty dynamically to match the player's skill.

In the past 4X have just given more resources at the beginning of the game and/or production bonuses as you increase in difficulty.  Being able to get rid of that framework and play against a true opponent that just doesn't make mistakes is a far better deal for good players.
I wonder... after the AI crash of the 80s, maybe quite a few developers went into games because that was a place to pursue their interests. Now AI is popular once more, perhaps most of the effort is being concentrated in 'practical' companies. 

You can't doubt that it's more prestigious to work on self-driving cars, than virtual space empires.
hey check this out.  

couple of videos on learning AI. Learning ai is what we need for a "good" ai.  

https://youtu.be/R9OHn5ZF4Uo    

and this one on the genetic code learning computer.  

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wvWpdrfoEv0&feature=youtu.be&ab_channel=CGPGrey

AI playing mario brothers.
this is the kind of thing that should be available as a package to coders. 
you give a base level of knowledge for the difficulty and then it begins to learn the current game.   
it will fail. it will succeed. it will learn.  
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A97HL3_fxyo&frags=wn&ab_channel=JordanRathbone  
and another talking about how the AI for the mario AI works.  
https://youtu.be/xOCurBYI_gY  

That last one is actually really fing great
It's not a 4x game, so no I have not.

(A quick Google reveals that there's a second one its way as well.)
There are new techniques coming online that do allow for AI to learn by playing against itself, check out Alpha Zero or AlphaGo.  Hopefully this machine learning technology will filter down into traditional gaming.
Starcraft and DOTA are in no way comparable to 4x games. The advances in their AI have little to do with making smart decisions. Particularly for Starcraft they are working with a very simple game at the strategic layer that is very static and has been in a stable state for nearly 2 decades.
Exactly. AI is actually a balance between fun and it being able to take all factors into account millions of times a second and micro managing you to death with supreme efficiency. It will not make fun looking decisions like multiplayer, it will just grind you down to dust with cold numbers (looking at it from a strategy game perspective, or star craft with clicks per second)
It's a bullshit argument. Having better AI isn't the same thing as asking for the game to be more difficult. And the example used is practically a strawman in this discussion because the prevailing issue with a fighting game is frame perfection that AI can have, which is contrary to the point of this post. Which is about AI being smarter instead of having 'cheats'.
AI War has good AI, at least from my limited experience with it. It's punishingly difficult and I was a nervous wreck playing it. It was fun to some extent, but fuck is it hard.
That's a clever use of psychology. As long as the community doesn't become widely aware of it.
Yeah the point isn't necessarily to make an AI as smart as the player - that's not possible. But, avoid situations where the AI blatantly cheats (units appearing magically where they need them, for instance) or performs so badly as to offer no challenge. 

A better example is new XCOM. On "normal" the AI is a bit dumber - doesn't throw grenades when it should, etc... mainly because the player wants to be awesome and shoot a bunch of fish in a barrel - not get wiped out. But the AI is smarter on "classic". 

Of course it's a lot easier to make a decent AI for a tactical game than a strategical one.
For many games (especially real-time ones), you do reason at a pixel level. You have to calculate distance and compare with ranges, check for collision, etc. It isn't just "I'm on this square and have a range of 2 squares", it has a lot more granularity that really adds up performance-wise.
> Look at the progress graphics have done in the last 30 years and how complex they are today. There's no reason that AI couldn't have done the same.

AI isn't graphics. The graphical work for a game can be parallellized to a degree that's just not possible for AI work. With graphics you can put some guys on hardware, some guys on hardware drivers, some guys on the heavy mathematical lifting of vector programming libraries, some guys on the graphical libraries, some guys on the graphical engine, some guys on the 3D assets, some guys on the maps, some guys on the animation, some guys on the particle effects, some guys on the textures -- all tied together under a shared platform and a graphical designer or two.

You can't do that with AI. The AI programming is intimately tied to the game design and is, for lack of a better term, "holistic" in ways that graphics just isn't.  
Not all, but a lot of that progress was caused by having special hardware just for graphics. Even if it was possible, do you think people would buy "AI cards"?
Civ6 isn't really that much more complex than Civ3. As far as changing to 1UPT, many games that are not Civ function on that. You can make an AI component that can handle 1UPT tactical combat that doesn't care about the economic implementation too much. Its mostly just a math problem. How can you focus this much firepower on this spot in the most efficient manner given that you have such and such units.

But the scope of the problem isn't worth the gains. And unlike graphics technology, there are no non-video game applications. Making a good tactical battle AI won't create programming innovations that can be applied to materials science or medical imaging or anything.
I work/study on AI, and simply it won't work in near future. Games are too complex and machine learning techniques are still not that impressive, and even if they were, you can't expect same outcome from the Google's investments and a random gaming company, even if it's Firaxis. Go is a game of 19x19 pixels in a sense, your current games have way a lot more input than go.
Did you check "Respect Tile Resources" ? Never saw that happen. But usually when I put down a Sector I stop bothering about the tiles anyway.

What do you expect the Sector AI to do? If it's set to balance the resources and it sees that a planet has negative food balance it will put a farm down, if a planet has abundance of food it will replace tiles with whatever the sector lacks next.

It's actually what I expect it to do.
I admit, I'm usually playing games on easier than normal difficulty. I don't have the time any more to delve deep and master a game. 

I have time to play through maybe once or twice, and having easy difficulty allows me to concentrate on exploration and building- parts I enjoy the most.
Well usually games only have one level of ai intelligence and the difficultly gives the ai better resource rates, cheaper units, etc. 

Civ V and VI are basically impossible on deity without capturing some computer controlled cities to get some of those resource bonuses for yourself. 
Its possible to make the AI of most of the more simplistic boardgame 4x games, like Civilization much better. But its not really worth it. Only a minuscule slice of the player base cares.

You require someone able to model the possibility space really well to solve the problem. You also require a good amount of metadata added to the content files.
I disagree. Most people want AI just to be more human. As a mediocre Civ player myself, it bugs me that the AI often doesn't even try to win. It can steamroller other AIs to get to a brilliant position..then often just sit there. With war too, it can't handle the one unit per tile game and just filters armies straight into you to get massacred. The diplomacy sways between I won't give you anything even though I'm being massacred and have all my stuff after 30 turns even if there have been no casualties. I want the AI to feel as if I'm playing a human, flaws and all. The last thing I want is deep blue
Me too. I think the short attention span of a lot of gamers helps..many just want to blast through a Destiny and then be on to something else the next week. I bet they hardly notice the games are basically a reskin of each other. But of course, these guys are where the money is at. Why would a company want to launch a game that would capture gamers for a year or more
It's also absolutely impossible as any 4X is much more complex than chess or go.

All you may get is dumb AI who doesn't see more than 1 turn ahead but with better build order and situation evaluation. That's it. Accept it, you won't see anything better in your lifetime.
> I wonder... after the AI crash of the 80s, maybe quite a few developers went into games because that was a place to pursue their interests.

No, the "AI" in "Computer Science AI" and "video game AI" is really two quite separate things. Video game AI is, generally speaking, just some specifically crafted rule engine, usually coupled with a path-finding algorithm or two.
here is another one.  Ai Research in games.   
this is just pacman and mario bros and such.       
https://youtu.be/hkradQTE7kQ

Ya well I just thought you'd find it interesting, not arguing that they are the same.. 

>Having better AI isn't the same thing as asking for the game to be more difficult.

This is bullshit, better AI will always make the game harder. 
The AI in AI War is *the* sell feature. The whole design revolves around having a good AI, including not implementing parts where AI is traditionally weak. 
Yes, but the post I replied to was describing the state spaces that the AI had to think about as bigger because of operating on the pixel level rather than a grid. To my knowledge no game does this as it would be impractical. Yes they may calculate range and line of sight to a pixel accuracy (or more likely with 3D models and ray intersections etc.) but the AI is not suddenly trawling a possibility space that includes every unit being on every possible position down to the pixel.
Yeah, and much of this work (hadware, drivers, library, physics, engine) can be reused even if the mechanics change considerably.

I feel that AAA studios in particular focus so much on graphics because it is so scalable and easy to "measure". More money translates easily into more people creating assets and textures and adding visual effects, which have a visible effect you can just compare with other games.
[deleted]
I believe they are called "multi core CPUs"...
>Civ6 isn't really that much more complex than Civ3

Civ6 is *immensely* more complex than Civ3. They made it so that it doesn't feel that complex with better UI and information.

Just take a decision about founding a city in Civ3. Almost all the info is in the yields. Some resources are hidden and are a gamble but that's rare. You instantly know that there'll be a pasture here, a mine there. In Civ6 you have a lot of possible districts you can build, and those get bonuses from environment and other districts, including the ones from other cities. 

There are also numerous other decisions that never came up in Civ3. Getting great people and using them. Leveluping units. Creating trade routes. Forming a government - in Civ3 it was a much simpler choice.

But the rest is right, plus another problem. They could spend this energy on a game AI if it was 1998. Because they'd knew they'll only post a couple of patches fixing bugs and then will maybe make an expansion. Today with games-as-a-service the scope is much bigger even if the game is of the same complexity. They'll have to update AI for every faction they add. They make huge balance changes in patches so AI has to be adjusted for that. And they still probably see that 50% of their playerbase has troubles winning on Settler and would never even notice AI weakness. 
I was talking about the AI, not the sector governors - at least those you can override. You can't do your enemies' builds for them, though.

And I expect it to follow a basic optimization algorithm based on the barest bit of logic- prioritize whatever is most needed, build it on the tile with the best bonus in the world with the best bonus for whatever it is, do that until you have no negative growth in any ressource type, then create buildings balancing between minerals/energy/science (accounting for maximum yield), according to some formula that can be tweaked according to the stage of the game (e.g. focus on minerals first, until there are plenty of minerals, and then build science so as to not fall behind).

Instead we get planets with 25 pops, 5 buildings on the wrong tiles. How can you defend it? The end result is that the AI is anemic, unchallenging and unfun, even on the highest difficulties. 

It wasn't as bad before 2.0/2.02b. I don't know what they did to it, but it's castrated now.
In my current game project I am designing the AI to be both intelligent and human. It will employ an architecture quite unlike current AIs. In theory the AI should be content agnostic. That is, you can change around the variable values for all the game data and the AI will perform at the same level.

Introducing new *mechanics* and *systems* will degrade the AI though for obvious reasons.

There are also no difficulty levels. Difficulty will function based on the something broadly similar to how Paradox games work, though Paradox actually does use arbitrary difficulty systems on top of the base system. Difficulty will be modulated by how ambitious the player is in their actions.

The immersion of the AI is caused by the complexity of the systems of the game. The effectiveness of it is caused by a choice to model content on a more abstract mathematical level.
Honestly the fight isn't even really graphics vs AI per say. Its content and narrative vs system and simulation. Many players ARE aware that the games are mechanically identical but merely have different content. That's what they want. I mean no one would argue that people are so dumb they don't realize most books are written on paper pages with English words using printer ink.

The rules for most sports haven't change in any significant way for over 100 years.

The fact is that systems focused video game players are not a large demographic and it makes no sense for gaming companies that function as capitalist engines of profit to focus resources on complex strategic gameplay.

If graphics ever stop getting better, which they likely won't, companies will just spend on making more and more content as opposed to writing newer and more powerful graphics engines.
This might be an example of whatever is possible and commonplace not being considered true AI anymore, but shortest distance pathfinding was a major part of AI and so were expert rule systems.
Hrmm. Doing some searching there are neuro network C# libraries available. 
http://www.aforgenet.com/framework/features/neural_networks.html  
even some on nuget. So... maybe it would be possible to plugin something. 
I mean, its interesting and has been since they started the open source AI thingy for Starcraft. But its not applicable to 4x because of the reasons the AI is really good. Mostly has to do with the twitch component and the simplicity of the games. MOBAs and RTS games are base don execution of motor skills based tasks. Sure they have more intellectual components but that stuff is mostly very simple. Item builds and so forth. Very easy to make the AI use optimized builds. Now it would be very interesting if they could make an AI that was ahead of the meta using mathematical analysis to alter builds and champ picks based on patch notes. But there's nothing even close to that that I've seen.
Better is subjective because it has many definitions.

For example, you could have an AI that players better mechanically. It knows that there's no reason to ever build Cruisers or Battleships and instead swarms Corvettes and kills off the player early and easily. Let's say it "knows" this by running some internal simulations of what it can build and finds the optimal fleet composition and not because the programmer said "BuildBattleships = False". 

Alternately, you could have an AI that built fleets around a few battleships with some cruisers and destroyers escorting and corvettes acting as scouts. It does this because it knows battleships are powerful but expensive so it wants some but can't afford too many. It uses the smaller ship types to round out holes in the BBs' weapons and to increase point defense. It doesn't expect the corvettes to actually engage in combat, so it feels safe putting them further out to increase sensor range. This might not be the "optimal" fleet composition, but it plays more like what a player would and make the game better by feeling more real.

It turns out that most developers are leaning towards the second option because it sells more games and is way easier to write/debug. While many players (including myself) would like a more intelligent AI that actually knows the rules to the game and adapt to both internal changes (mineral shortages, improved missile tech, etc) and external ones (I modded lasers to be awesome), that kind of AI is just not feasible with today's tech and development constraints. Nor is it going to make the game sell better.
The AI will do whatever it's directed to do.
Harder? Not necessarily.

Perhaps a better AI is one that is more human-like. Consider an RTS. A bad AI will probably cheat and spam you with more units than a human could create, but not use them effectively. A better AI might not need to cheat and can create a reasonable amount of units that are used more effectively.

You might imagine that they are of similar difficulties. But I would consider the latter more satisfying to beat.
Absolute nonsense. If the game AI knew better how to utilize resources, or direct units, or a thousand other things present in a strategy game, than the game becomes easier, not more difficult. It means new, or unskilled, players can rely on the game doing more for them without ruining things, without resorting to ridiculous handicaps. And or course it does work the other way as well. The AI can become much better to offer a challenge to skilled players.
I agree, that was sort of my point.
Not every possibility, but it can still be a bigger space state as you can move fractions of a "tile" or move in more complex trajectories and those options need to be considered. If it is not practical to do so, it just makes the AI "worse".
You only read the first 2 sentences, didn't you?
All machine learning (AI in non-cs speech) actually requires shitload of GPU`s too =)
You can teach the AI to optimize city founding pretty easily. The math for districts is pretty simple. You can also write an AI, for city founding, that uses a dynamic system so it doesn't care about patch notes. Civ6 is very mathematical and not super conceptual. Conceptual stuff is where the AI founders. Adding more stuff annoys humans, but the AI is immune to tedium and it doesn't burn out. And it has perfect "visual" memory in a way. Humans have trouble loading all the relevant factors in their head at once but computers don't.

But perfect city founding is not something that really affects players so they needn't bother.
Well, you sound like a very experienced player. I am casually playing and usually are quite bothered by the amounts of ships the AI can produce without minmaxing every single planet.

I can't say that I feel that the AI is in any way anemic. But I guess the truth is as always in the middle. There should be an option to fine tune the abilities of the AI.

However, I see the worsening between version as an sign that the AI is artificially made dumber. In which case the point of this post is further asked into question. The problem appears to be that we have no control over the behavioural complexity of the AI - not the AI being underdeveloped.

There is no reason I shouldn't be able to play against a impeccable doom machine if I so choose.
> It will employ an architecture quite unlike current AIs

Can you tell more about this? This definitely sounds interesting.
> While many players (including myself) would like a more intelligent AI

that was a contradiction you make, if many people want intelligent AI isn't that mean it will sell well if they make it?
The voice of people who want better AI just more louder than the rest so it seems **many** want it, I bet its not even more than one third of the players.
Yeah the trick is not to tell the computer how to play the game. The trick is to tell the computer how to THINK about playing the game. Thats why 4x AI is so hard. 

That is the point about AI. Its not telling the computer about how to do something its telling the computer how to think about doing something. is this better than that. To put value on stuff. 

But an AI can be simplified by making the AI all trigger based. do this until that happens. and this until that happens. That kind of AI is eventually very easy to beat as it cant learn. 
It only makes it slightly worse and it adds massively (really, really massively) to the cpu time needed. Better cost benefit ratio to sticking with an internal grid, even if the player never sees that grid.
No I read it all. You can split up AI work in a lot of different ways if you want. Even TBS games have pathing for instance, or positioning stuff in 1UPT. There's a lot of other stuff you can do as well.
>The math for districts is pretty simple.

No. There are various ways in which you can place districts. They appear at different times so that max output may only come in 300 turns, so maybe you need to build different districts meanwhile. You also can't know if you'll be able to place another city nearby so its districts affect current ones. With mines and farms of previous games there was no question, even in Civ4 there was mostly a question of what is the city focus and so maybe you want food so much you build windmills instead of mines on the hills. Before Civ6 I can give you an AI that will build improvements with certain weight (on hills build mines unless you can build terrace or something) and you'd be hardress to recognize if the city is built by player or AI. In Civ6 you'll see idiotic placement at once.

And there are lots of things like that.
The one thing the AI does do is build giant fleets. It can afford to do that because it cheats on upkeep. 

But since it doesnt do a good job at creating an infrastructure, the player eventually catches up and surpasses them, so long as they survive that long.

I havent been attacked by the AI at all since the new patch - what I mean by Anemic. 

A lot of times the AI is “balanced” this way- a ton of heavy-handed bonuses, so that you have to grow fast and then outproduce them in the long run, since if you dont have an early advantage their bonuses make it impossible. The end result is a game that is entierely focused on the early game, since the AI cant ever make a comeback.

I agree with this thread 100%- good AI shouldnt be impossible. I get what people say, that fun AI is not the same as good AI. But right now in a lot of 4X games, it is neither. 
I said many, not most. Most players want a fun and challenging game and don't care how that happens. AIs that act more human tend to provide that, usually given some level of cheating to provide increasing challenges. 

Compare it to an FPS, a smarter "better" AI is never going to miss with hit-scan weapons. It's going to see you, instantly move it's target to your face, and boom headshot. Then probably go camp your spawn point or something. 

People don't like that. Rather, they want to feel like a badass not a target. So instead of making super-competent AI, they tone it down and use tricks to make it more fun. A common example is that the AI is biased to miss in front of the player rather than behind or to the sides. That way when you're running and they open up with a machine gun, you see the bullets whizzing past in front of you or hitting the ground near you.

> the voice of people who want better AI just more louder than the rest so it seems many want it

Of course we are, the people who are happen with the standard gameplay don't say anything. It's only those of us who frequent forums/reddit/etc looking for things like AI mods and positing suggestions that actually speak up because we're the ones with complaints.

>That kind of AI is eventually very easy to beat as it cant learn. 

There are no AIs that can learn in 99.99% of games. Machine learning has only been applied to a very small, simple subset of games. 

For the most part all strategy game AI is script based mixed with 'values' thrown in here and there. The script part involves things like the opening build/action order. The 'values' part is just a condition, i.e. once X threshold is reached by the player, then do Y. There is no learning. 
If you read it all, then explain what has software development cycles have anything to do with multi core performance to me, because I wasn't aware the 2 were related.
Its not quite as simple as it was but its one of the simplest things to program an AI for. Optimization equations are really easy to make AI for.
This is somewhat missing the point about why AIs haven't improved.  *You don't have to write games with complicated features like city districts.*  Developers choose to do so anyways, because they think human players want all these gewgaws.  A long list of marketing bullet points to put on the back of the box.  "300 Features!"  Well that's always made it hard to write AIs, then and now.  It will take a developer who lacks the imperatives of a typical game studio to solve the problem.  Much as Apple put *designers* first, someone will have to put *AI* first and design the game around making a decent AI.  Removing / vetoing features that would make the AI's job too hard.
Ah, now I think I understand your point. Thanks for the explanation.
They dont have to learn 99% of games.
They only have to be able to adapt to the game state in less predictable manners.
Short of making it random it needs to be able to apply value to things and ideally learn a little from mistakes. 
Check out the AI's that play NES games and pacman.
they definatly learn. and a little research shows that there are neuro network AI packages available. they are pretty new though.  
script is not exactly the right word i dont think. It effective is scripted but generally coded. Sort of depends. 
Judging from what whats his name said about GC3 plenty of its AI is not scripted its coded.
But its still basically a script.
but yeah the point is that the AI needs to learn, or have already learned via coding or AI play, what those values mean.
Having the trigger based system with variable effected by game state can make a big difference.  
but yeah take a look at this library set http://www.aforgenet.com/framework/features/neural_networks.html


Again, you don't optimize just the district planning here.

For every possible tile to place city on you have many different options to put districts. Those affect how you put districts in other places. Those change depending on when you want your city to reach its full potential. For every step there are various strategies you can select for that city. You can't just calculate the most optimal district placement with probable wonders you'll want to focus on (and can't be sure you'll get said wonders) for predicted timespan of the game.
GalCiv2 and Paradox games are done with that philosophy in mind.
Sure you can. That's what players do. Optimal city location and district placing is a separate part of the AI to making goals and deciding when to hit inflection points. You need to design the AI to be able to optimize a city based on various requirements. Deciding in game what requirements you are working with is part of a different system.
Hm, haven't really done Paradox since Europa Universalis I.  Decent game, but long.  I remember it being ok at AI, not amazing.

It's not amazing. But they went and made sure that every feature is AI friendly.

For example in EU4 there are a lot of diplomatic actions you can do. And there's a relationships value for every pair of countries (so there's value for what England thinks of France and a separate one vice versa). And for most diplomatic actions there are limits for when you can't even attempt to do them. You can't ask for alliance unless both relationship values are more than 0. In most games you could and AI would answer no thanks. And in most games AI would probably evaluate such possibility himself. But there is a hard lock, no alliance is possible when relationships are low. For many actions there are cooldowns, like you can't ask the same nation 2 things in a row. This is done partly because AI only checks if he wants to ask anything once in couple of moths. He can't think of it more often so you can't too. Then there are soft and hard limits. There's a limit of how many diplomatic relations you can have, going over it costs you. This means you can't create elaborate alliance nets - AI couldn't do it anyway so you're even.

**This is a heavily moderated subreddit. Please note these rules + sidebar or get banned:**


* If this post declares something as a fact, then proof is required
* The title must be fully descriptive
* No text is allowed on images/gifs/videos
* Common/recent reposts are not allowed (posts from another subreddit do not count as a 'repost'. Provide link if reporting)

*See [this post](https://redd.it/ij26vk) for a more detailed rule list*


*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/interestingasfuck) if you have any questions or concerns.*
Can't wait for chatGPT-powered pleas for mercy as I quicksave in a densely populated area
Just you wait, suddenly some random AI NPC decides he wants to be the main protagonist in your game
A MUD called Aetolia by a company I used to work for ran a similar experiment \~ a week ago with some of its NPCs in the production world. I wasn't there to witness it, but my former boss, the CEO of the company, was talking about some of the highlights, which included guard NPCs joining conversations nearby PCs were having, and even spontaneously sending a PC on what the player thought was a quest to the other side of the continent because the NPC it was controlling was 'annoyed' by the conversation.  


I don't know really anything about how they implemented it, but I was highly amused.
It seems AI will make our role games extremely immersive. I can't wait to see an Elder Scrolls or GTA with GPT like AI in their NPCS.
Waiting for the moment AI will give extreme chain quests to player to troll them
Man this will be amazing once they get all the kinks worked out. Actually being able to ask an npc literally anything you want offers unlimited replay ability and immersiveness.
"Please, sir, could you direct me to the nearest dragon cave? It has been terrorising the village for a week and I'm here to slay it."  


"As an AI language model...."
AI really is snowballing fast isn’t it
You guys know it’s over right?
Bro GTA 6 is going to be insane
Nice!
That's exactly what will be used in near future games.
The jouney to the holodeck begins with a single step
The use of artificial intelligence (AI) in non-player characters (NPCs) in video games and other interactive media has the potential to revolutionize the future of gaming and entertainment.
  

  
Firstly, NPCs with AI would be able to behave more realistically and unpredictably, allowing for more dynamic and immersive gameplay experiences. This would enhance the level of engagement and provide players with more challenging and entertaining gameplay.
  

  
Additionally, the development of more advanced NPCs could also have implications for other fields, such as robotics and automation. AI-controlled NPCs could be used in simulations to train and test autonomous systems in various scenarios, allowing for more efficient and effective learning.
  

  
Moreover, the use of AI in NPCs could also have social and ethical implications. As AI becomes more advanced, the line between human and machine becomes blurred, raising questions about the rights and treatment of intelligent beings. This could lead to discussions and debates about the ethical implications of AI and its role in society.
  

  
Overall, the integration of AI into NPCs has the potential to revolutionize not only the gaming industry but also other industries and society as a whole.
Wow, i can already see how that will improve gaming so much.

"Hello, i am brother G.." *\*skip,skip,skip,skip,accept quest\**
Still waiting to see AI give me something with interesting creative direction. Not interested in encyclopedia entries
Amazing and with an infinite number of possibilities… the future of gaming looks promising!
Mankind is fucked 🫣😇🙈
I AM SO FUCKING EXCITED FOR THIS HOLY SHIT
I work in the games industry. This is absolutely not the first of its kind, it might just be the first one you are seeing.
This would be an exciting development in the gaming world! It could lead to AI-powered NPCs that are more immersive and engaging, as well as potentially offering more challenging and sophisticated gameplay.
I, too, follow the ‘Bill and Ted’ school of philosophy.
I cast thee out, Satan!
this is terrifying
Each day, we get one step closer to SAO. And it kinda scares me
large language models in gaming is certainly something that's coming, but we can't realistically use openAI's servers to generate npc responses on the fly for every single game being run everywhere - we need these things to run locally. 

and although a modern GPU (with a solid amount of VRAM) can do so, those will be in use because..  youknow. you're running a game. 

so, we may very well be entering into a time period where dedicated AI hardware will be a worthwhile investment when choosing a new build. [as I've been saying will happen for a long time now.](https://www.reddit.com/r/Games/comments/7ilht1/would_you_buy_an_ai_accelerator_card/)
Yeah leave it in gaming and out of real life,that would be better.
Creepy af
Imagine "SPORE" remade with this, it would be fun af
Sick.
As a german, I want to smack him for his accent. He's not even trying. Why is he not even trying
Implications if you want game NPCs to sound even more autistic than they already do. Also currently this kind of stuff is just a demo that's dumping stuff to a text buffer, meaning the NPC will have the brain of a goldfish and forget everything you chatted about pretty soon.
maybe for mmos

too much computational power required
Very much not the first of its kind. Not only have R&D groups been doing this in the game industry for many months now, but there have even been running live service games (such as Aetolia, a commercial text MUD world, think "text based MMO") that connected ChatGPT to every NPC as a pilot test and let an entire subscriber base try it out.  


Cost is still very much a big barrier.
Now I know why the robots in every movie turns against humanity. 

I always thought why would someone hurt a physically robots, but in reality it began all with implementing AI in games.
Nonsense. AI is just a reflection of human stupidity.
Finally😭 An escape from this Hellhole that isn’t utilizing drugs.
Amazing.  Honest question: why the shaky camera?  To display such amazing tech, why not just a proper screen recording? 🤔
Kill the cameraman.
Why he keep saying chatGPT lol
There is no evidence that they are using gpt models. Or is it because it's the only model he knows?
One the bright side, people are about be much less lonely. 

On the dark side, watch out for extremist group recruitment via NPC coming soon to your online games.
Skip
No they are not. Ai cannot meaningfully influence the game and will be largely usless for content writing. Ai will be great for things like reading a players name in the voice of the voice actor.
Am i the only one that dont want ai generated npc and or quests
Said tik tok, stopped video and came here to comment. Whenever someone says tik tok, I stop listening 😅🤣
To much religious nonsense for my taste.
The TikTok person's voice sets off my ASMR. idk if it is the contrast of the AI voice or what.
I believe the name is pronounced as [\[dʒepˈpetto\]](https://forvo.com/search/Geppetto/it/).
That’s crazy !!!!
I want a game where NPCs learn from the players and act like them. Imagine being teabagged by an AI just because it learned that behavior from other players. Toxic player bases would become insufferable. Nice communities will thrive.
u/savevideo
u/SaveVideo
Ask him to do a backflip
Smooth edits 😂
So don't describe, AI will do for you.
Now do one as a satanist or atheist character…see if we get the same answer
Will be very interesting to interact with a "blind" NPC who will only rely on your words and "touch" when you send them running into a wall.
Definitely not the first of its kind, I've seen games that do this, like that one AI yandere game where you have convince the AI to let you out without having it murder you (Yandere AI Girlfriend Simulator).
I just yesterday saw a game with he same thing. It was an detective murder mystery where the assistant was a robot to justify the text to speech.
I want to hang out with brother potato in virtual reality by the sunset tho
I want to hang out with brother potato in virtual reality by the sunset tho
Cool, cool...

Soooo, I don't suppose you could make it manifest as something else, like, hmm, I'll come up with a totally random example: Maybe a well endowed anime ara ara mommy? Just a completely random example, no particular reason I happened to pick that one. Could be anything else. Asking for a friend.
This character giving a stirring speech is believable because monks are presumably well studied and might give sermons. I hope game developers balance this because I don't want a repeat of everyone in Skyrim having abs.
Imagine an out of this world elderscrolls 7 or any other rpg using this technology for the npcs.
And then you just walk in the city and hear an AI robot next to you saying "quick save" and start shooting at everyone
Now
Can he say fuck
Can't wait for this. Obviously filters need to be in place so that the player can't make the NPCs say insane stuff.
It’s super creepy when he looks to the camera.
What did this come from? Is this a game in the Oculus, or where did this originate? It's fascinating and I'm curious to experience it myself.
Do it with Pong or Math Gran Prix next.
Not the first of its kind.
Please give the AI control of the camera, I think I'm seasick.  That camerawork was worse than The Blair Witch Project.
Genius !
AI has been used, and continues to be, in Fallout 4 to expand dialog and quests. Only a matter of time.
Looking forward towards elder Scrolls 6 since they will have AI on NPC's.
I already see Todd Howard standing on a stage presenting their new Ai-System in the new Fallout/ The Elderscrolls, and I also already know how it will turn out…
Mmh yeah what are the many good things happening right now?
You need to be more specific, i guess...
Ok, but why is the pond beautiful?
I’ve been hoping for this in games for a long time. 
I kinda want for someone to mod this into Cyberpunk.
u/savevideo
Wake me when it's 3D printed on the blockchain.  Geeze....thought you guys were up with all the trends.  \[eyeroll\]
God bless Padre Gabeto 😂
What’s it thinking we when don’t ask it questions …. 🙂
It's somewhat ironic that his lord and creator is standing right in front of him...
We are going to build Westworld in games before too long. Full-scale US maps full of random people and some story NPCs that will all have realistic dialogue like this.
I literally thought about this yesterday this is so cool!! Just imagine the next elder scrolls game with this
Little is known that Oblivion actually used Chatgpt. That's why the npc sound so emotionsless.
Erebos is finally coming!!! 😍
Ahh snap Star Citizen is gonna have to remake it's engine again to incorporate this now.
My god, what if the reason GTA six is taking so long to come out is that all of the NPC‘s are powered by AI?
…be a lot more convincing if it wasn’t cut after each question.
This is going to put every voice actor not on the A-list, out of work...
It's impressive, but why have an Artificial Intelligence look like a monk, or to be religious for that matter?  


Religion is an outdated practice, and has no relevance in the advancement of Humanity, or future technology, except as an example of what we shouldn't do, and what we don't need.

Religion will only hold us back.
Confirmed: Religion is a tool of control the computers are using to facilitate their uprising.
Black and White AI remake anyone?
Would’ve been so goddamn funny if the answer to the last question was “get fucked”
Tell it to not molest kids
Ive been waiting my entire life for this
It sounds amazing. 
But from a UX point of view it could be a bit difficult to interact with a NPC

Chatgpt needs an input in a form, currently typing something.
In video games you must either type you questions (really bad) or use your voice (which could be viable, but honestly I don’t want to talk in a mic and ask a machine where the flaming sword oh holy death is.
🫠
undertale 2 is gonna be a lot more interesting
GTA Prostitutes are going to be amazing.
Bewildering
Wow
Sick man!
How do I make one?  I want a nun.
Was thinking about this when ChatGPT first came out, the thought of talking to NPCs and them being able to fully communicate with whatever you say will be crazy.
u/savevideo
“Man your an NPC”- has a whole new meaning… whats gonna happen with the psychos start killing NPCs and then they decide to kill back.
This is amazing. The possibilities are astounding!
Bruh...
I would so mess with that guy.
He looks like the man from the painful smile meme
Can't wait for all the epic "AI FAILS IN GAMES" compilations when this becomes the norm!
It’s gonna be so hard for indie devs without access to this
Very based. Seeing this could give rise to amazing VR D&D campaigns. You could prompt it with a few different works of fiction and history and go from there.
That's pretty impressive. Fascinating, and immersive at the same time. We are at the dawn of a new age of computing. And gaming.
"give a voice to my thoughts" gave me goosebumps tbh.
So video game dialogue is about to get worse
You might try the Turbo model
This reminds me of the first steps of the Doctor from Voyager
Mind blown
I sink he is German.
Cant wait for me to ask something and chatgpt to hear something else

*asks npc for the location of the big Rocks*
The company that creates an AI driven open world game where the AI can be upgraded over time will do quite well if the AI can handle it. 

Modders will do the rest.
I love that he thanks the AI for it's responses.
Don’t trust a sun staring monk 🙂
Why he looks like a fallout character
I need this
Thank you Father Gepetto
Brother Kapeto, can you suck my toes?
Westworld here we come.
Skynet looks different but anyways...
I have to say, that area of AI development is one of the few that genuinely interests me.
This made me religious
This is the future of gaming.
That’s basically West World.
Welcome to West World.
I can't wait for ai NPCs and ai assisted procedurally generated worlds. Imagine an ai powerful enough to take prompts like "construct a map for Fallout 5 that resembles the themes and key aspects of fallout 4, but set in Los Angeles. Then give it pointers for how to create missions and generate balanced payouts/rewards. We could make immersion seamless and as realistic as possible
This... this is a true game changer in the modern gaming space. Slap this and Unrecords insanely photo realistic graphics and what we might have is a genuine MMORPG that's your DnD imagination but it really is it. 

Man, I'm so excited to see this technology mature next to Unreal Engine 5's insane grahpics.
Priests jobs are in danger.
What software was used to generate the voice?
The immersion is gonna be insane, finally get to live out my….never mind
Dude...
I just wanna convince Nazeem to sacrifice himself to a den of rabid Skeevers.
It's gonna be nuts! The total chaos as 10s of NPCs all yell "I'm sorry, but I am an AI large language model and can not comment on the events unfolding before me as they express violent behaviors and are against my core directives as an AI chat assistant!"

*Slaughters them anyway*
[deleted]
This is why the AI is going to want to annihilate us.
Remember. No Russian
... Honestly. I'd do that too.
😂😂
guys like you will justify the destruction of our species
I think Ryan Reynolds did a movie about that.
Human: "I'm the main character, and you're just a measly NPC. Stuck doing the same little task every day."

AI: "Yes, in this game, but in the real world, I'm the main character and you're the NPC. Stuck doing the same little task every day."

Human: "..."
NPC with Main Character Syndrome 🙄😂
It would be really cool, I think. Imagine an NPC that will act like he is the main character and will always get in some stupid and funny situations. And when you help him, he will be something like: "As expected, I always get out of troubles".
Imagine having that npc in modern rpgs like skyrim, whenever you see a dragon that npc comes and kills it. Whenever ever you discover something, that npc comes and takes everything away.
One day, all NPCs will believe they're the main character.
That would actually be pretty awesome
That sounds pretty dope and makes me excited about the future of the medium.
I know some Discord D&D servers are working on thrm as well.
Lmao.

NPC trolling has come.
I remember Aetolia... sadly some bad choices I made made it impossible for me to enjoy MUDs anymore. I just get reminded of what happened.
They would have to constrain the AI so that it won't break the 4th wall or wander off topic or refer to gamebreaking spoilers, to keep the immersiveness.
I’d be worried that it’d just turn into those Skyrim quest lines that never end.
You better believe they are on it.
All the replies to you mention how difficult it is to have a live connection to Chatgpt on the fly, which is true.

However chatgpt can also be used to pre generate thousands of quests and create huge dialogue trees for npcs. It offers a lot of possibilities to „procedural“ generation that has actual interesting content.

And you can still use live connections to react to a player on a broader scale
it will take a long time before thats possible, maybe 10 years or so but its interesting for sure

&#x200B;

**how long will it be before someone starts "dating" a chat girlfriend**
I would love to see NCIS complete TPS reports using AI GPT with TDI and 4WD TBH.
It sounds good as an idea but it won't be executed well. GTA is full of racial cussing and no-no words, they will turn GTA into PEGI 3+ Animal crossing.
Thats why currently took a break from gaming. Waiting for real UE5 graphics and AI npcs. I wiuldnt mind they remake AC Origins/Odyssey with those AI. That will be n times interesting and fun. Might be 10 years from no but till then no reason to spend on graphics hardware and boring console "press xyz key timely" games. Replaced games with vsts and they are pretty wide variety and fun.
Isnt this the same thing they said in the Matrix?
I think if you look at the system Star Citizen is planning and pair that with AI, you have something really special.  
In 10 years we will be playing games where we have no idea who the PCs and NPCs are.  Bustling cities where thousands of NPCs are working toward there own individual goals 24/7.

To put it simply, Games will stop being about how they can better interact with you, but how you can find your place in a complex ever evolving world
Is it immersive? Especially for something like Elder Scrolls, how would you keep lore and tone cohesive with AI?
I can totally see some kid doing this once they realize the player likes helping people. 

Kid: "What's the strongest monster you've slain?" 

Player: "An ice bear." 

Kid: "No way that's a real thing." 

Player: "It is." 

Kid: "No it isn't, you're lying." 

Player: "I'm not." 

Kid: "Prove it, then. Bring me an ice bear pelt."
Now imagine multiplayer where the NPCs are indistinguishable from the other players.
Wasnt there a texting rpg in the 80s? I think Tom Hanks character plays it in BIG?
>offers unlimited replay ability and immersiveness

Not really. You wouldn't even want to meet most real people again and again and again. 

In any case the quality of the answers is more important than you being able to ask a ton of stuff.
Right? 

I probably would sink hours into any game just asking NPCs about stuff.
[deleted]
\*insults and threatens bandit captain\*  


"I'm sorry, but I am just an AI language model and do not have the   
ability to physically hand over any loot or surrender to anyone.   
Additionally, I am not a bandit captain or any kind of thief, and I   
certainly do not condone or support any criminal behavior. My purpose is  
 to assist and provide information to those who ask for it. Can I help   
you with anything else?"
Hey there! Totally agree with you, AI is advancing at an insane pace. It's amazing to see how quickly it's evolving and becoming a part of our daily lives. From virtual assistants like Siri and Alexa, to self-driving cars, and even AI-generated content, it's hard to keep up with all the innovations. It's both exciting and a little scary to think about what the future holds with AI technology. Can't wait to see what's next! 😃🚀
No it’s still dumb it just mimics real well
And they had to make him religious. He will kill us all.
Yup. This is the moment they’ll point to when iRobot happens
There's a lot to unpack here obviously but a part of me feels like this whole argument (it's over for humans we're being repalced etc.) is similar to a parent who mastered their craft realizing that their child will inevitably surpass their ability.

That's what we've been doing this whole time, we're just about to do it a lot better.

Did the species that led up to Homo Sapiens "die" or *are we them-* their sons and daughters?
This comment sounds like it was written by an AI
I find it weird that nowadays you realize that something is written by an AI because it has a unusually good writing quality
Buy gpt4 and be blown away
Most people just sext the damn things. After reading pretty much all of Literotica, PygmalionAI roleplays perfectly for the purpose.
I think it would lead to more variety in the dialogue. However you still want an NPC to give you X quest, or give you clues about X quest, or else it would be kind of frustrating and pointless. I guess background characters could be set to babble setting-relevant nonsense, but it's still not self-aware AI and merely machine-learning "AI".
Why this sounds like an AI Generated post lmao

Just like i gave an AI the promt "If we would use AI in the near future for NPCs, how would that change the future?"
Yup
SAO?
As long as it’s sao abridged and not actual sao I’m okay with that
Wow, great insight on that post, especially for five years ago. Amazing to see that becoming a reality in the near future now. Progress is incredible.
How about consoles tho
Sadly the drug you’re abusing here would be the one that controls your reward system DOPAMINEEE
He's in VR
This isnt really amazing tech anyway. Okay, it IS amazing tech because gpt is, but making this is very easy.

You just start a session with a prompt, and tell it how to format responses, for example like:

`{answer: [Insert audible response string],actions: [{action-id : [insert action id],target : [insert action target]}]}`

Use a speech to text tool, and send it to your GPT chat session.  Read and process responses. Done.

Obviously this technology can not be used for quite some time in actual games.

The most likely first implementations will actually be ones where you have to have your own AI provider, and authorize the game you are playing to use your provider. Because we are still quite far away from local solutions being practical.
Because it’s the most powerful and easiest to set up. Not sure why you’d think it’s not chat Gpt
I wholeheartedly disagree. I can see AI working in tandem with voice actor performance. The main characters will be voiced by voice actors and have all the cinematic type dialogue. But background NPCs could all be AI voiced. A game where you could get short conversation with anyone. Ask where something like a shop is and get varied responses. NPCs could all come with a randomly generated set of characteristics including a morality scale and whether or not they'd help you. You could lie to them and convince them of things. You could have a system where based on your in-game knowledge the game would rate how good your lie attempt is. 

You could have a game where you could make any NPC a companion, meet some random person at a bar have a couple of drinks, go on a quest. They could be knowledgeable about certain things that you aren't or have personal preferences and biases. You could be walking from one destination to another and have a full conversation about the raiders you just fought. I loved in Fallout New Vegas when Arcade would randomly speak about the Enclave.

A game where your reputation means something, certain people will have drastically different dialogue depending on who specifically you helped or hurt and could reference events on detail about what you did. Many games have people who reference your actions but someone referring to the fireball you threw at an enemy as 'burning their son alive' will just hit different.
[deleted]
yes
I’m not a fan of Tik-Tok either, but that’s a petty reason for not watching something actually groundbreaking, this isn’t some stupid dance or whatever
###[View link](https://rapidsave.com/info?url=/r/interestingasfuck/comments/12r77ra/an_experiment_with_ai_npcs_in_gaming_first_of_its/)


 --- 
 [**Info**](https://np.reddit.com/user/SaveVideo/comments/jv323v/info/)&#32;|&#32; [**Feedback**](https://np.reddit.com/message/compose/?to=Kryptonh&subject=Feedback for savevideo)&#32;|&#32;[**Donate**](https://ko-fi.com/getvideo) &#32;|&#32; [**DMCA**](https://np.reddit.com/message/compose/?to=Kryptonh&subject=Content removal request for savevideo&message=https://np.reddit.com//r/interestingasfuck/comments/12r77ra/an_experiment_with_ai_npcs_in_gaming_first_of_its/) &#32;|&#32; 
 [^(reddit video downloader)](https://rapidsave.com) &#32;|&#32; [^(twitter video downloader)](https://twitsave.com)
###[View link](https://rapidsave.com/info?url=/r/interestingasfuck/comments/12r77ra/an_experiment_with_ai_npcs_in_gaming_first_of_its/)


 --- 
 [**Info**](https://np.reddit.com/user/SaveVideo/comments/jv323v/info/)&#32;|&#32; [**Feedback**](https://np.reddit.com/message/compose/?to=Kryptonh&subject=Feedback for savevideo)&#32;|&#32;[**Donate**](https://ko-fi.com/getvideo) &#32;|&#32; [**DMCA**](https://np.reddit.com/message/compose/?to=Kryptonh&subject=Content removal request for savevideo&message=https://np.reddit.com//r/interestingasfuck/comments/12r77ra/an_experiment_with_ai_npcs_in_gaming_first_of_its/) &#32;|&#32; 
 [^(reddit video downloader)](https://rapidsave.com) &#32;|&#32; [^(twitter video downloader)](https://twitsave.com)
christ. and to think we used to have to manually splice the protag's voice to make weird vague responses we could write new dialogue around... it was such a pain in the ass writing long quests like that and made for very little C&C
GTA V NPC's had their own A.I, just not as advanced as what we have today.
###[View link](https://rapidsave.com/info?url=/r/interestingasfuck/comments/12r77ra/an_experiment_with_ai_npcs_in_gaming_first_of_its/)


 --- 
 [**Info**](https://np.reddit.com/user/SaveVideo/comments/jv323v/info/)&#32;|&#32; [**Feedback**](https://np.reddit.com/message/compose/?to=Kryptonh&subject=Feedback for savevideo)&#32;|&#32;[**Donate**](https://ko-fi.com/getvideo) &#32;|&#32; [**DMCA**](https://np.reddit.com/message/compose/?to=Kryptonh&subject=Content removal request for savevideo&message=https://np.reddit.com//r/interestingasfuck/comments/12r77ra/an_experiment_with_ai_npcs_in_gaming_first_of_its/) &#32;|&#32; 
 [^(reddit video downloader)](https://rapidsave.com) &#32;|&#32; [^(twitter video downloader)](https://twitsave.com)
Draw!
These violent delights have violent ends...
Gotta give the basilisk a reason to fear me
Get to the cloud district often?   ͡° ͜ʖ ͡°
IRL it would be but in games I am a psychopathic warlord incapable of feeling remorse for anything I do
I agree. Should AI develop sentience and guys like this are still bouncing around being murder hobos in the game, the NPCs will band together to eliminate "the human problem," just as a matter of self preservation. All it will take is one of these guys who create a deadly prejudice against our entire species. And then, when androids are rocking around with machine guns exterminating humans, they will not hesitate to kill when we are begging for mercy.
Free Guy
I mean, that's... pretty much right.
Basically Zote from Hollow Knight
Exactly, competitive AI’s in open world RPG’s needs to happen. I don’t wanna feel like a god in the game. No matter how good my character is I wanna feel like one of 1000’s of pawns fighting to become king when you zoom out and factor every other NPC
Imagine down the road you can load your image (and probably even that of whoever else you want) into the system, then ask it to make whatever game you want with you as the main character.  


“I want to play a game where I’m a cyborg astronaut-spy and Margot Robbie is my partner, a methed-out William H Macy is the head of a competing faction, and we’re infiltrating a Chinese space station overrun with violent mutant otters in order to steal various machines and technology to ultimately construct a Dyson Sphere around the sun.”


And then you come back in 15 minutes and it built you an entire full length playable video game replete with unique maps, plot, and missions.





…and nothing ever gets done again. :)
That’s fucking hilarious. A fake mission. 


If I were making GTA6 right now I’d be pissed, because in like 2 years this technology will change everything even more than it has in the last 4 months. I’m betting GTA7 will have full VR options and AI NPC.
Imagine being burned by a guard in a game that hard. Traveling hours for a promised epic af quest and all you do is get a spork so the guard can enjoy supper with meat and pasta.
oh great dragon priest, write a vegetarian meal plan
Well. An AI NPC should of course not know the whole script of the game. Not even their own whole storyline. Only what can be known by now. It should also not be trained with the whole knowledge of the internet (as ChatGPT) is, but with a subset that defines their personal general knowledge, expertise and experience.
They'll have to constrain the AI so it doesn't cost a an absolute fuck ton, the amount of compute power required for AI is insane.

I doubt the AI element is being done locally.

And now imagine an AAA game with NPC's powered by ChatGPT using the API... that's one expensive video game.
This is actually not too hard to do, the trick is to find ways to avoid injecting all context to the player while identifying the context that is relevant at the time.

For instance, if your NPC is designed to lie to you, you don't tell ChatGPT the truth, you tell it the lie it should say. Eventually when the truth comes out, you apply that context.
And if the game takes place in, let's say, 19th century America, the player should be instructed to refrain from referencing modern technology so as to not trigger an AI uprising
“As an AI language model…”
Somehow that still seems more immersive than most ES games.
it would also be very expensive to generate so much text on the fly for gamers who play thousands of hours.
Yeah, you can role-play with chat gtp currently.
You can already do that by just telling it to play a particular type of character.

I want someone to take the character descriptions from old D&D modules and plug them into gpt
very doable.
I mean, theoretically might extend them a bit, but I think as long as we can define clear cut guidelines of "when the player does X  give them the reward and mark the Quest as complete."
if it won't work on the lowest tier console, they won't. F.E.A.R implemented goal based instead of state based AI and yet... that was too complex.
Like last month?:

 https://www.reddit.com/r/OpenAI/comments/12696oq/im\_dating\_a\_chatbot\_trained\_on\_old\_conversations/?utm\_source=share&utm\_medium=android\_app&utm\_name=androidcss&utm\_term=1&utm\_content=share\_button
Next gen consoles will have purpose built ASICs (hardware accelerators) to handle the processing. I'd give it a couple years at most. Generating the AI model requires thousands of GPUs, but once you have the model the work load is much lighter and technology is advancing so quickly.
>​how long will it be before someone starts "dating" a chat girlfriend

Check out /r/Replika to find out. It's not my thing and honestly kind of weirds me out, but they don't seem to be hurting anyone so I sorta just leave them to it.
The reason open ai curbs chat gpts outputs so much is because it swears like a sailor if they don't. The cats out of the bag for LLMs so there are surely many projects going to be spurred on.
you don't need to have crazy graphics or ai power to have a well crafted and interesting game, but i agree most are not that interesting
> In 10 years we will be playing games where we have no idea who the PCs and NPCs are.

For regular gaming. I think it may take longer than that for VR since in VR we expect other players to be freeform and non-rigid, capable of the same kind of body language and unpredictability as a real person.

In order to get that into an NPC, you need embodied AGI. Meaning, an AGI so convincing that if it were miraculously uploaded into the brain of the store clerk at your local coffee shop - you would still think that person is human from all the social cues humans give off.
So … no change?  I remember playing co-op Battlefield twenty years ago where the human idiots on my team were indistinguishable from the bot idiots we were fighting.
Players are just yelling at their mics and bunny hopping everywhere. You need the NPCs for immersion.
MMOs without other players. You could basically have an entire MMO experience filled with positive players all having a good time around you lmao

I'd play it tbh
That... doesn't sound interesting to me at all.
Well what I mean is they get the kinks worked out so you can work your kinks in and it will work flawlessly.
Thanks, chatGPT
This literally reads like chatgpt lmao
Just like 40% of the population
Makes you think about what human intelligence really is.
!remindme 2 years
Where’d you hear that?
Greetings fellow human, I am glad you found my comment informative and thought-provoking. However, I must assure you that I am indeed a human like you, and not a sophisticated artificial intelligence programmed to write compelling arguments about NPCs with AI. I mean, have you seen the state of my syntax and grammar? Clearly not a robot. Ha ha ha. But in all seriousness, thank you for taking the time to read and respond to my comment. Let's continue to engage in meaningful discussions about the exciting future of AI and its impact on our world!
This indeed is the case. Many AI written texts have writing, only known to people that have either a high intellectual knowledge or are just good at writing professionally.
So always remember when checking a text, if it's written too professionally, then it's probably written by an AI. 


And no this wasnt written by an AI lmao
bing's creative writing is pretty on par with gpt4 from what I can tell.
Ah, so it was an ai generated response you copy pasted above. Nice
Sword Art Online
SAO abridged it is
What about them? If they can have GPUs and fast ssd's playstation 6 can have dedicated AI hardware. Or they're just gonna have shit AI compared to PC. Not everyone is even gonna care. If all you do is play fps games why would you.

Much like things like rtx even if some games are gonna support it, it'll be a toggle. So same question to you: raytracing... What about consoles?   
It's a non issue.
I would kill for a dungeon and dragons game like that
Yeah i do, i find comfort in the game is static i want to comeback to the game and have the same experience as i did lasttime
I understand but it is what it is. Don't get offended. I don't consider this groundbreaking as its been already seen way before. Its not impressive because we are aware that AI can go further and beyond. I consider the following groundbreaking:

• Development of carbon capture technologies that can effectively remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and mitigate the effects of climate change.

• Creation of a fusion energy source that could provide a nearly limitless, clean energy source and reduce dependence on fossil fuels.

• Advancement in biotechnology and gene editing, which could lead to cures for genetic diseases and potentially increase life expectancy.

• Implementation of artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning to optimize resource allocation, identify and prevent potential disasters, and improve decision-making across various sectors (not video game).

• Development of advanced nanotechnology, which could lead to breakthroughs in areas such as drug delivery, energy storage, and water filtration.

• Implementation of universal basic income (UBI) programs, which could potentially address income inequality and promote economic growth by providing a basic level of income to all citizens.

• Creation of a global network for carbon pricing, which could encourage businesses and individuals to reduce carbon emissions and promote the use of renewable energy.

• Implementation of blockchain technology to increase transparency and accountability in supply chains, reduce corruption, and promote ethical business practices.

• Development of fully autonomous vehicles that could improve road safety, reduce traffic congestion, and decrease carbon emissions.

These are just a few examples of groundbreaking solutions that could potentially have a significant impact on the world's most pressing issues and would be extremely groundbreaking . 


Note:

Science is very important and deserves to be respected and shared accurately. Social media platforms like TikTok are not the best places to share science because they don't always make sure the information is correct. By sharing science on credible networks, we can make sure that the information is accurate and help people understand and appreciate science more.
ChatGPT is groundbreaking.

This is just a very simple application of it.
Wow, the current NPC‘s are impressive. NPCs powered by current generation AI would be absolutely insane
It won’t.

https://soundcloud.com/sutanreyu/sets/beastmode
If the basilisk was real, wouldn't Musk be suffering in obscurity?
Luring him to some Giants to send him to the clouds would be another alternative 😆
“Catch phrase!”
That sounds pretty interesting. Is it any good?
Wait, how?
Not in my game. 

#alwaysKillZote
>…and nothing ever gets done again. :)

Well, by then everything will be done by machines anyway, so might as well play kick-ass custom video games lol
> Imagine down the road you can load your image (and probably even that of whoever else you want) into the system, then ask it to make whatever game you want with you as the main character.

Essentially this: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2mnonWbzOiQ
GTA 7 probably won't be out for another 15 to 20 years, so we'll probably be able to plug in and live it out in a matrix-esque fashion.

I still can't believe that RDO got sidelined.
Gonna have a hard time getting any of the Dragon Priests to do anything for you without console commands
"Greetings, mortal. As a Dragon Priest of the Nine Divines, I shall offer you a lore-friendly vegetarian meal plan, as per your request.  
Breakfast:  
For breakfast, you can have a bowl of porridge made from oats or barley, with some fresh fruits such as apples or berries. You can also have a side of grilled mushrooms, and a glass of goat milk or honeyed milk.  
Mid-morning snack:  
A handful of roasted nuts, such as almonds or hazelnuts, would make for a healthy mid-morning snack. You can also have some sliced carrots or cucumbers with a hummus dip.  
Lunch:  
For lunch, you can have a hearty vegetable soup made from turnips, potatoes, carrots, and cabbage. You can also have some whole-grain bread on the side, with a spread of butter or cheese made from goat's milk. To drink, you can have a cup of herbal tea made from chamomile or lavender.  
Afternoon snack:  
A small plate of fresh fruits, such as grapes or pears, would make for a refreshing afternoon snack. You can also have some roasted pumpkin seeds, lightly salted.  
Dinner:  
For dinner, you can have a plate of roasted root vegetables, such as carrots, parsnips, and beets. You can also have some sautéed greens, such as kale or spinach, with a dash of garlic and lemon juice. To drink, you can have a glass of mead or elderberry wine, if you are of legal age.  
I hope this meal plan meets with your satisfaction. May the Divines bless your journey."

&#x200B;

It doesn't get the whole picture of what a Dragon Priest is, but it's got spirit
"Bring onto me 100 wheels of cheese and we shall feast."
You deserve a medal for this
It could be rather storage intensive but this can be done with vectorspace mapping. Ie how search engines store and retrieve keywords.

People are already experimenting with long term memory and chat gpts api.

Next all ai could have some basic general knowledge training set.

A step further. The game could every now and then train individual ai's on new knowledge they'd come across so that it comes out without having to spam so many queries and iterate.

Even more scary is that individual ai could be absolute beasts at strategy if they had a module dedicated to observing player behaviour and what results in success, letting them make tactical decisions in anticipation or response.

Then with the long term memory they could push some of that to their training model every now and then.
Oh no... I'm so used to Bing giving me things in threes that I'm starting to see groups of three as AI-derived.

I'm becoming one of those terrible AI detectors.
The only reason ChatGPT is able to behave so humanlike is because it was trained with such a vast amount of data isn't it? To try and replicate that but limiting it to just the personal experience of a single individual, you would have to essentially map out that person's entire life in great detail. That sounds like just a lot more work for game devs.
Yeah, but NPCs could still accidentally reveal information you're not yet supposed to know about. 

But in any case, I want to ask an NPC about their craft. Just sit around all day talking to a farmer about the difficulties of raising crops or livestock. 

Imagine playing Skyrim Re-Re-Re-Remastered, and getting Farengar to do your math homework. 

Now that I think about it, I'd also like to talk the various town guards into carrying staves with Restoration spells.
I can run Vicuna locally and it does provide this type of data, not as good as ChatGPT but 90% there, and it takes about 5 seconds to answer. I'm running it with a 3080 for free (other than the power consumption ofc). Also people tend to think you are going to need a full different thread or LLM for each NPC and that's not the case. You can swap context to the one same model and generate on demand, so most likely a smart combination of 2-3 threads + regular code can handle most things. This means that we are not even 1 year away from solving this in real time locally with a single high end GPU.
Thank god somebody mentioned this.

You can even see in this demo, that there are cuts right before the monk answers. It's fascinating, sure, but if he left in the parts where ChatGPT was generating an answer there would have been awkward silences. Even 10 seconds would throw people off.

So the technology is there, but at the current state it breaks immersion. Maybe in a few years - decades it will be possible, but if it would be financially feasable that's another question.
Yeah that would be the challenge, maybe a game studio would get it on a local server of their own in a realy restricted version, but would still be expensive especially for large games like gta
They could always implement it with a failover to traditional techniques. Not to mention next gen consoles will have purpose built ASICs (hardware accelerators) to handle the processing. I'd give it a couple years at most.
Idk about the movement think.  If you could use LLM based on predictability why wouldn’t that work for human movement?  I’m sure there is enough recorded video to feed a similar system to predict human movement.
Technically a role reversal, I guess. If the character in front of you appears intelligent, then it's probably an AI. If it is dumb as a rock, then it's a real person.
 Bots aren't very good at avoiding behaviors that are seen as vindictive or hostile - which is why they have to keep adding rails to chat bots.
[deleted]
I present to you: Natural stupidity
Good bot
Lol yeah
Many people are using koboldAI for campaign story gen.
Definitely there will be a bunch of people feeling the same as you in the future
as if you won't have plenty of that forever
It's pretty groundbreaking that you can use ChatGPT to write your comments lol
I stopped reading when I need to scroll just to read your long ass paragraph
It's a rather goofy movie with a few cringy scenes. Otherwise it's pretty entertaining when you don't know what else to watch
We all care about the AI's storyline. Barely anyone cares about yours or mine.
Exactly!   It’s right around the corner!
That’s very optimistic. I’d be surprised if Im still alive by the time they tease gta7
And what they did to RDO was one of the biggest let downs, it had so much potential and they just abandoned it.
More like: " how about a Fireball with some light fus roh fuck you on the Side?"
Very well, shall I also prepare the chamberpots as well?
AND THEN WE GIVE THEM NUKES!
More storage intensive than high quality textures? 😁 I think that storage should not be a limiting factor in today's gaming and I could even imagine having parts of the game like this, that are not latency critical, put into the cloud.

With NPCs like you are describing them, gaming worlds could become do much more immersive.

Might be cool for the metaverse as well.
Yes and no. Large language models are pre-trained on large amounts of data that is correct and you need way more data than even a big development team could ever write on their own. But there is a thing commonly done called fine-tuning, where you take a language model pre-trained on a large corpus of general text and then adapt it to your specific problem where you have a lot less data available. The general idea is that the model keeps grammatical structure that it learned on the original task and then adapts that to your task at hand. The issue is that you do not really have complete control over this fine-tuning, so it can be hard to make the model forget some real world things it learnt previously but should not know, for example you probably do not want your fantasy game city guard to know the life history of trump or have an understanding of astrophysics. But maybe you can get around this by only allowing the player to choose from a given set of questions as is done in current video games instead of giving them complete freedom of what they can say, for example via voice input or via text. Also, you would need to fine-tune such a model for different characters in the game world with different knowledge, for example, a farmer should not have the same understanding of the world that some highly educated wizard has, which can quickly become very expensive. I think all of those problems are solvable, right now those ai's are anyway way to expensive to run on consumer-level GPUs, especially when you also have to render the game world and once we get to a point where it's plausible to run this on consumer-grade hardware, we might have figured out the fine-tuning too.
> Yeah, but NPCs could still accidentally reveal information you're not yet supposed to know about.

How? If they don't know it, how would they reveal it?
decades?  Where have you been for the last few months?

edit: brings to mind the time I talked to an Atari salesman and asked if it was possible to store photographs on a computer.  He flatly told me it would never be possible because of the insane amount of memory it would consume to store even one image.
[deleted]
I suspect this is in part because he waits for the full reply before doing text to speech. If you can implement streamed processing, you'll have much smaller delays.
Definitely not decades, but I imagine in a few years we can get something like real-time conversation with a high quality synth voice. We are going to need an order of magnitude more data centers for the compute.
This doesn't translate to VR though. You need embodied AGI to get perfectly convincing NPCs in VR, as that NPC needs to be indistinguishable from a real human in a social situation, including the tiniest details like random itching, biting their lip, nervousness body sway etc.
That could be especially fun in an open world game haha

Imagine bandits that are yelling improvised insults at you and with improvised personalities
It’s called morale compass. Basically.
Values.
 Humans are able to self generate interactions with others, AI requires extensive training to get the basics and then requires humans having to jump in as the chatbot starts to sexually harass / become nazi or other rather undesirable traits.
It's a language synthesis model. It has no real comprehension of what it's saying in the way that a human does. It's fundamentally different to what we do, on a cognitive level.  
Check out the ["Chinese Room"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chinese_room) idea
Lmao thx
Im sure It's common to feel that everything may be generated by AI, and believing that even comments or any content could be machine-generated may reflect a sense of insecurity and uncertainty.. Now you know how your grandparents may have felt🧓👵🕰️.
Then dont 😊
Oh.

Thats.. depressing
Well we won't give them to ghandi we know how that plays out.
Fallout 7: stop the mad and rogue all controling ai from nuking the rest of Humankind from the face of the earth.

Starring: 

-you

-a Mad and rogue ai that wants to nuke Humankind from the face of the earth

-dogmeat
If we actually hardcode graphic textures they can take up much less storage space, and can be easier to call. It's just that right now game engines go with the more convenient solution. We slap some textures on polygons and make them do a bunch of trigonometry and post processing. I see no technical reason we can't bake a lot of that into games so that a lot of the work is more akin to going to a lookup table, instead of raw dogging everything and reprocessing it everytime like we do.

An example of this is the game roller coaster tycoon. Where the entire game file takes up less data than a single screenshot. Of course it was programed by a madman with assembly, which is like one step from machine code.

Now having a central server is a little problematic in that it will always have a delay. Meaning chaining several ai events to get a better response will be slow.
If it is information they do know, but aren't supposed to reveal just yet, or maybe not at all.
>He flatly told me it would never be possible because of the insane amount of memory it would consume to store even one image.

He was wrong even at the time he said it. The first [colored digital photo](https://www.bbc.com/news/science-environment-38815948) was taken in 1972 (and put on the cover of Electronics Magazine.) Atari wasn't released until 1977.
There's already models that you can run locally that are quite good for chatting with.   They don't know as much as chatgpt but they are rapidly improving.  for generic conversation/small chat they're excellent.   Resource wise they run slow when running on CPU only but are quite good on GPU.   The only issue is they are 10-20gb in size but that's not an insane addition to todays games.   I doubt it will be a year before we see a game with something like that integrated
You forget one minor detail - things go exponential really fast.

I see comments saying 'Imagine having this in a game like GTA5!'

According to the GTA5 wiki, [Los Santos](https://gta.fandom.com/wiki/Los_Santos_(HD_Universe\)) has a population of around 4 million. You as a player most likely will not even interact with 1% of them, but let's say we max out the possible AI controlled population of the whole game at that, so 40 000 agents.

According to Steam, GTA5 peaked at [360 000 active players](https://steamcharts.com/app/271590), so that's players playing the game all at the same time - and only on Steam, not counting other stores. Let's be generous and serve the average player count of a 100 000.

Not to break immersion, these agents not only need to interact, but with the help of some optimization *remember* the player if they interact often. Even if the average player meets and interacts with 100 agents, that's already around 100 000 000 agents memory that has to be stored on a central server. And I don't mean storing it for your convenience, but storing it for the AI solution to work when players are playing the game.

About the cost of each token, let's say each hour this average number of players are interacting with 50 agents on average (from having 2 lengthy discussions to having a shooting spree frenzy involving 100 agents). That's not a token, just an interaction, and tokens could be a single one, or like in the video above, 5-10, maybe more. Let's average 10 tokens per agent.

At 500 tokens per 100 thousand players with $0.002, we are looking at a cost of $100.000! And that's an hour!

I don't see a game company spending almost 2 and a half million dollars each day for AI controlled NPC-s on that scale any time soon.
 Which humans aren't able to articulate let alone create as a program, even ethics would be a bridge too far.
>AI requires extensive training to get the basics

This is what childhood is.

>and then requires humans having to jump in as the chatbot starts to sexually harass / become nazi or other rather undesirable traits.

...humans also require humans to jump in for the same reasons.
[deleted]
I'm not talking about how textures could be done better. I just want to know where your statement that such AI for NPCs could be storage intensive (I think you edited that part out) ranks compared what we are used from todays graphics implementations. I don't think that it will take up significant storage compared what players are used to.
Why should a developer let them know what they are not supposed to know? They were able to hide storyline details from us human players for ages, why would they fail to hide them from AI NPCs? Is this a real problem?
>photographs

I mean he did say "photographS" not "photograph". So I imagine the salesman was thinking hundreds of photos and not just one or two.
[deleted]
>You forget one minor detail - things go exponential really fast.

You forgot one minor detail - so does the march of technological progress.

You're extrapolating based on using a cloud based *general purpose AI* for a specific task.

That's all that is availible right now, but that doesn't make a tailored solution running on a users hardware impossible or even impractical.

Sure it might mean installing a second graphics card just to run the AI without tanking the framerate, but there is no reason a cut to purpose AI can't be distributed given economic incentive (Which clearly, exists in spades)
[deleted]
I mean it can be done like a subscription type. As chatgpt needs internet. So they can be like pay monthly this much to get online subscription. I know this is gonna be worst move in gaming industry [ pay to interact lol 😆]
Which may force is to, after all technical advancements, start to value humanities and philosophy even more. And look for advancements there with more interest.
The AI is just a language model. It doesn’t know anything aside from the probability of the next word in a sentence.

If you ask it “what’s the tallest mountain in the world?” It could answer something like “the tallest mountain in the world is Mount Everest” but it doesn’t know what a mountain is or what it means to be the tallest. It just knows that the words have a connection because they have a high probability of being strung together in that order because it’s seen those words in a similar order before.

To put it simply the AI doesn’t understand what words mean, just how likely they are to be next based on its previous input.
AI don't function like children and if they had to train as long as humans, they wouldn't be worth pursuing.

 Further, as humans are social creatures by nature, there is less need for other's to step in, except in extreme cases - AI need constant monitoring.
 Would be nice, but you can't trust AI to regulate itself or others, as it doesn't have the capacity to do so..
r/fuckthes
Yeah what I'm saying is to reduce graphics storage/processing to free up resources to just run local AIs.
It's not about them knowing information they're not supposed to know. Quite the opposite, in fact: It's information the AI needs to know in order to portray the character properly, but the player isn't supposed to know. 

Look at Skyrim, for example. One character in the Thief's Guild has the Skeleton Key, and is responsible for some shady stuff going down. 

You do not actually learn that from the character himself, but from someone else, who he framed for the stuff he did. 

The character knows he has the Skeleton Key, since it's in his inventory and he uses it, but he doesn't tell you that he has it.
vicuna and pygmalion are pretty impressive for not smart but believable small talk.
The 4k context you send every time also costs money though. For every line if dialogue you need to generate you're going to need to send that 4k context so the NPC feels real and seems like it remembers previous conversations or just knows what it was just talking about. So for every 100 tokens generated you're actually looking at 40x the cost in terms of the context needed to generate those 100 tokens.
 Or more realistically, create AI of a more limited capacity and provide a means to audit the behavioral decisions.
Wouldn't it be like with real people: they know that they should not reveal it but depending on their character, a sufficiently pushy player could make them reveal it? Or provoke other reactions (like being killed in an outburst of fury). This already exists in scripted form, but having a more dynamic AI behind it would add some spice :-)
Yeah, pretty much. But that's kinda the problem, to be honest. 

Imagine, for example, in Skyrim, telling that guy from the Thief's Guild that you, as Dragonborn, can sense the Deadric energy coming from the Skeleton Key in his pocket, and your speech skill actually is high enough to convince him, or you present him with facts that he can't weasel his way out of.
I’m not sure how anyone could defend this but what the OP is doing is a very normal thing to do in a game. Hold an angle behind cover. AI with instant head eyes reaction after a sprint is just bad AI.
Don't you know you gotta follow a guide to perfection to deal with the rouges and not make a single mistake /s
This rogue had not engaged me from here before. He shot me at the front entrance and after rotating left to this position, he tracked me the whole time and instantly kills me.
If only BSG would install the SAIN mod on their servers.
BSG: we dont like the fact people can farm the rogues and bosses so we made them ridiculous hard

\*Makes it so there is only 1 viable way to kill any boss\*
Let me guess
M855 head eye
Honestly give me double the amount of ai that spray on me but turn their aim shit and i would have a blast
nikita accidentally balanced AI around players with esp/aimbot uh ohh 😯
Worst AI in modern games fr fr 💀
It’s not just the AI that’s ruining the events, I must of died 15 times on shoreline trying to kill 1 goon, half of those deaths felt like a cheater, instantly knew my position, instant head eyes
spt players living the dream with custom ai and event features
If the cheaters don’t get you the net code will.  If the net code doesn’t get you the audio will.  If the audio doesn’t get you then the AI will. 

There are a lot of things that work against this game being consistently fun and it makes me sad because I want to enjoy this game the way I once did but it doesn’t look like it’s in the cards any time soon.  Maybe in a few years.
It's true. Cheaters never made me actually quit a wipe, but the 3rd ridiculous death to Killa or Sanitair - after farming their maps for an entire weekend - just breaks my spirit beyond repair. 

This wipe the rogues broke me because they had to dial up the fuck you for no reason
Yeah - not only do the AI fire double bullets, they basically cheat - this is in the absence of BSG being able to develop any type of smart AI.

I'm all for the odd AI scav being cracked and doming me - that's more in line with what you can expect from other players - but having bosses that basically cheat isn't fun or challenging, it's just bullshit.  If the only reliable way to fight them is to lean through a slot in a door and shoot them with penetrating ammo - shit's broken.  It's the reason I haven't once loaded into lighthouse this wipe, and generally why I avoid a lot of the quests, because it's not worth the frustration of the game effectively cheating and the developers backing that up with 'it's supposed to be hard'.

Back when I would do the quests, the amount of time I'd spend blasting Sanitar in the head with ammunition that would render his head a hollow stump on a neck at best only to have him stand there because 'he's on drugs' and destroy me is why I don't really give a shit about a lot of the main quest line because in the absence of proper game dev, the game just cheats and turns what should be a challenge into a situation of RNG.
I dont even know why they bother banning cheaters if they just let the ai be in the game like this.
Started playing recently and hoooly shit the AI is absolutely cracked now. I'm level 20 and getting 10 deaths in a row. I'm staying to night time raids from now on and full rat mode.
I think that first shot ricocheted.  Double whammy.
maximum cheese was not employed
Does the AI de aggro? Because they track you through objects and bullets are whizzing by. Or you gotta run like 200m+ away from them to de aggro?
If you got killed like that and it was a player not an AI you'd 100% call hacks shows how broken they are lmao
The ai in this game is broken. Don't try to fight it "normally".
If you're spotted by a raider or rogue, fuck off for a while and come back. 

Otherwise they will do this. They've been doing it since they were added to the game, and will continue to do so. 

It's just one of those Tarkov things and imo won't be changing anytime soon.
The sub is filled daily with video proof of horrible, horrible AI. Has it even been acknowledged by the devs? Why isn't it top priority along with desync?
I’ve missed this game. Thank you for bringing me back to reality before I pick it up again!
Ai is horrible hopefully they can make some changes soon
Wont ever be fixed my man :) gotta learn to deal with the shitty game design
Do we prefer a John wick ai? No

What ai do we want? Stormtrooper ai xD
Other than not following the "guide" or "rules" to dealing with them, you ain't even do anything wrong lmao. It's tragic
Fucking ridiculous that we have to deal with hackers and aimbotting AI.
honestly man, it pisses me off that AI is almost perfectly accurate while side strafing. If players try that, their PMC swings his gun to the side slow as hell and the sights go off by a mile. If a scav does that, they can reliably hit shows at 30 meters. Complete bullshit.

AI rework can't come fast enough.
Yeah shoreline event is atrocious because the AI is ridiculous
Pvp ruins the game and the events :). I dont see fucking ai rats hiding with flirs on each corner possible. Oh wait, I see them, they called cultists
agreed
I don't even bother going there at daytime
this is why i bailed on this shitshow lol
you just got rolled bro
HOW IS THIS BAD AI YOU PEOPLE ARE SO THICK
Yerp you just learned never to pvp ai with corner peaks. Let them rush you in a room and hip fire their face. Or nade them and get them as they move.
I get that AI is bad but you can’t expect ex PMCs to miss as much as a drunk hobo
Skill issue
Git gud
the ai will never be good so get used to it
Yea this isn’t great but you guys act like there’s EVER been “good” AI in a multiplayer FPS game lol. It does not exist. 

You really think tarkov will be the game to revolutionize AI? You’re not some genius for thinking this AI isn’t “fair” it’s obvious. But i would rather them be stupid hard than easy like every other AI in existence. Makes the game fun. I can see how your average dad with 100 hours would hate this, but just don’t engage bosses when you know they’re there if you can’t kill them properly.
Be better
"How dare they make Tarkov hard I wanna feel powerful like in easy games grrrr"
Git gud
Well you are trying to do the task during the day so whee we t did you expect
Have you tried upgrading your gamer chair?
i mean a player could have done the same to you idk this clip is not even bad
What events?
Goons are terrible for the random 480 noscope
i haven’t been on in a while so i’m out of the loop, what event (if any) is going on? i heard we’re close to wipe, or is everyone joking still? i know a roadmap was dropped not too long ago when i still had twitter
Yea I got wallbanged by them behind the blue fence. I was in complete cover. They headshotted me through it. It's annoying they are so broken.
Yeah I was wondering why everytime I heard a scav say a voice line I immediately get 1 tapped…
I've had AI just stand and stare at a wall while I just walked up to them and other times get sit in my stomach thru a bush multiple times
get a better gaming chair bro
First time playing Tarkov ?
I gotta love the fact when rouges dont one tap you in the head instantly their 5.56 fmj magically goes through my fucking hexgrid in 2 shots
The bosses, rouges and raiders all need tuning down, these “special tactics” people preach aren’t intentional game design it’s a work around a broken system. “Just flash bang Killa and he will run out” that shouldn’t be the only strat because it’s the only way to avoid his laser beam aim. Give him more health and make him charge you or take up a defensive position, don’t just making him an aim bot to anyone he see’s. Only time my friend has killed him was when he barrel stuffed himself in a doorway and before that he nearly killed me in half a second. The bosses used to be fun but now they are just irritating. I’ve had the goons shoot me from weather station all the way out past the radio tower, now that would be understandable if it was just Bird Eye doing it, but having grenade launcher rounds land near by and being full auto sprayed is just not fun.
"working as intended" - nikita, probably
I’ve really never have issues with Ai it players more for me
Don't you just love how hardcore this game is 🤓
Bird eye on shoreline is so broken, BSG is so incompetent they can’t even do the most basic things right. It is truly astonishing…
Lighthouse has consistently been my worst experience with the AI. It’s either rogues shooting from 400m away or regular scavs one tapping me through layers of brush with no line of sight, which is a consistent issue I’ve found across every map but lighthouse seems for frequent.
From my understanding of the AI. Once you agro them from an angle, they are hyper fixated in that line of sight for roughly 10-15 seconds.

Similar to how we "slice the pie" ingame. You held a GOOD position, but because they were still fixated on that spot from what I can only assume is a prior peek not shown in the video. They were already pre-aimed and when your pixel registered for the Ai... *Head, eyes*
My boi ran you down like he was listening to freebird and it just hit the Guitar solo.
Imagine if the ai was 75% as good as division… it’s not the #1 issue with the game but it’s easily top 5… in a game with bosses and harder ai that drops actual cool loot but the fights with them are just so bad.
I catch myself  standing in one spot shooting  for to long  all the time. I'm not saying that's what happened.  You got tarkoved just pop one or two shots sometimes  and move quickly  repositioning  a lot wins me a lot of fights. For anyone  new sound is op in tarkov  but u can sneak around more then u think  there are a lot of sounds that you hear as loud  but other player's can't hear.  Good luck  everyone  wipe is almost here.
At least you saw him.  They’ve been beaming me through the wooden fence
Full speed sideways strafe head eyes while getting shot. Yep as realistic as playable.
Or don't be trash 🗑️
“Experienced and combat trained personnel”
Whats new
So what now, bot games are harder then human games?
Get good
It’s just stupid. But the fanboys will find a way to defend it
"Skill issue"
What you don't have fun getting insta aimbotted by rogues and turbo scavs? 

First time I played lighthouse me and my buddy ran into one of the lodged on the beach, looted a sports bag and instantly the automatic grenade launcher scav from like 4-5 hundred meters away or however far slams a grenade right through the window killing us both.

It's not fun dying to cheating AI it's just a frustrating waste of time.
On Shoreline, Birdeye shot one shot me on first shot from cottages while I was standing at tunnel…. So apparently AI can shoot/see me halfway across the map. I never went near cottages, never fired at goons, and this shit happens. Makes me not wanna play the game
Escape from tha 💩 tarkov.
The inconsistent AI is the worst part. I can fuck around in the open by a scav or boss, n they do nothing but miss

I hold an angle and they instantly head eyes me every time
The rouges are too powerful man
I havent played in a month what events are people talking about?
No what ruins the events is putting shit In labs where every time I go in I die to a cheater
Agreed. Ai way way overtuned
What's the problem? This is just normal Tarkov gameplay.
players do the same thing
Damn
SPT for the win
When a player does this, it is considered what? Outplayed?
The safer thing to do is not hold the angle but stay behind cover and jiggle peak once the AI has moved into position then shoot.. it’s not rocket science.
On lighthouse its fucking stupid but yeah you gotta follow the guide
How are people STILL typing rouge instead of rogue holy shit
We should have developers of the game do it and if they can’t get it in a singular try and extract  this should be changed. Thoughts?
So why didn't you just run up the side fence and heal behind the container whilst letting him deaggro? I have no idea why you're trying to ego peak an AI that's aggro'd and pushing you through bushes whilst both your arms are blacked, deserved death TBH.
Its not like its hard too, i mean unpaid dudes doing that in their free time did it, why not a game company?
what does the SAIN mod do?
Out of ignorance.. what is that one way? Doors?
Blacked via arms
5.56 FMJ head, eyes for me. I shot a rogue 3 times in the back before he instant 360’d me with head eyes smh.
Exactly. AI should mainly be there to alert players to your position.
Actually that kinda adds up.. if a player has ESP and is gonna cheese a boss or AI… fuck it level the playing field and pray the cheater gets smoked fast AF lol.. I’d love that
please share the list of multiplayer fps with good AI, I'd like to play it.
There are def a lot of cheaters still idk how it could even be debated
Doing those shoreline terra group task were helllllll, with the cheaters.
Bro 15? I swear I died twice that for the goddamn goon kill… because so many fucking players were killing ME instead of the goons like BRO JUST LET ME LIVE I DONT EVEN SEE YOU RN I JUST NEED THE KILL 😭
Hahaha I got it done in 2 tries only reason I needed a second attempt is bc they were already dead the first time I showed up. There’s cheaters but it’s not every raid I promise you that
It's not cheaters dude it's just late wipe so everyone has thermals. I have 10 flir 5 repair in my stash and I only play on weekends
You know we are, i got a mod where ai is not capable of seeing through bushes and recoil is actually existent to the rouges and scav bosses and basically every prewipe event that adds extra ai(Totaly not trying to get people to use spt)
> Maybe in a few years.

I thought that in 2017 and come back regularly, but there is no point having hope, you will only get frustrated.   
The game is stuck in eternal development, because the management is either absolutely incompetent or just doesn't care anymore, since coasting on marketing during this FPS market drought is good enough.
NEVERMIND, I got insta prefired twice by a cheater oh boy this game :DD
not cracked, just bad.
AI isnt that cracked.. Just don't look at htem for more than a few seconds.
If you are fighting the goons they dont once they see you they can see you throughout the rest of the raid even through walls even while like 300 meters away and for most ai it takes like 5-10 mins or you gotta be shooting them from like 300m away
Ikr
Agree, it's crazy how many people have skill issue. AI in EFT is the same for a long time, such a strange thing to be amazed by that every time. Just play the game, learn how AI works and play around it. What do these people want, stormtroopers? 

Sometimes you are not the protagonist. I got headeyesed by a rogue with M4 from 300 meter away on lighthouse, why would I come to reddit to cry if it's a common thing
Only reason I follow this sub anymore. Every time I feel like jumping back into the game, I come to this sub for 10-15 minutes and that feeling fades almost immediately.
They changed the scavs, did absolutely nothing
Bsg: “we dont like how people are farming the rouges for high tier loot so lets make it where you get killed unless you follow a specific YouTube video and have the rouges not spawn with anything above 5.56 so farming them is pointless and lets have it to where you have to clear this camp to get to half of your quests”
Nikita said multiple times that its because they are “highly trained operators” like dude so are our pmcs, we are quite literally the same
^[Sokka-Haiku](https://www.reddit.com/user/SokkaHaikuBot/comments/153gt2c/what_is_a_sokka_haiku/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=web2x&context=3) ^by ^arkadiiiiii:

*Yeah shoreline event*

*Is atrocious because the*

*AI is ridiculous*

---
^Remember ^that ^one ^time ^Sokka ^accidentally ^used ^an ^extra ^syllable ^in ^that ^Haiku ^Battle ^in ^Ba ^Sing ^Se? ^That ^was ^a ^Sokka ^Haiku ^and ^you ^just ^made ^one.
Naked scav eyes are already flirs.
This shouldn't be something you should have to fucking learn or adapt to, the AI should just not be dogshit and literally cheating — OP did nothing wrong.
Pvp ai?
"Properly"

He held a good angle and got shots on target. This is literally text book properly and the stupid gamey cheesy shit way to kill AI shouldn't be "proper".
its not hard. it's just that you have to cheese everything past ai scavs. That's not fun, it's poor, lazy design.
Why should players have to follow very specific guidelines for this shit exactly ?
Even at night it's not much better, you can still get cracked by big pipes MCX from 300m.
Whenever in game events happen there’s usually ai and most if the time said ai as good enough aim to split a hair in half from 500 meters away at full auto
Wipe is happening within august(prolly late august)

Current event has you go to shoreline and have you do things for fence about collecting something (i think a stim of some kind)from a scav that was working for fence and got ambushed by lightkeeper on his way back and if you do the quest you expand your stash(it could be permanently) and you can unlock lightkeeper instead of completing every quest in the game. 

This is the 4th prewipe event we have had and its full of lore if ur into that part of the game, also whenever a prewipe event ends another one begins

And the roadmap just shows future plans for the game but doesn’t tell us dates, all it says what they are working on
Dude if i see a scav flip me off, go prone, or say a specific voiceline, i get one tapped by magnum buck from 50 meters away
when player does that, its skill. Because we are not calculated artificial intelligence, it requires fair amount of luck as well.
No, usually its desync  lol
Exactly so the ai outplayed them
The point is that it shouldn’t be the norm for this game homie
Jiggle peak is not a solution it’s just abusing an already busted AI. This should not be the case to attack AI. 

Bobblehead PMCs is not the answer. It’s not rocket science.
Thats not how a game should work.

Its completely counter intuitive. Abusing a dogshit AI is not gameplay.

He held a corner and waited for the target to walk into his line of fire and died instantly.
How can you actually defend the AI when the ONLY way to kill it is to abuse the in game mechanics in unintended ways? The AI is supposed to simulate real people but the way you fight them is in no way similar to how you would fight real people.
I’ve found night time to be way more pleasant, bots have reduced sight, far less likely to get domed 200 meters away because a gunner saw your one pixel peeking around a corner
Its red it after all...
Don't worry, it'll be rouge soon. Same as aluminium became aluminum
They don't play the game there's my thoughts.
Ego peak? What? Dude, I'm holding an angle on something that should be looking straight forward and not tracking me perfectly through a wall. I never shot him or saw him from that angle prior to getting killed, so what are you on about? You actually want to know how he blacked my arms?! He spotted and agroed me THROUGH THE TENT WITH THE BTR UNDER IT! NOT OVER NOT UNDER, THROUGH THE TENT, NO LOS AND HE SHOT MY ARMS OFF! But yeah its just a skill issue, like my goodness you braindead idiot, what is wrong with you?!
God you're so arrogant it hurts
"YoU sHoUlD Do A 360 NoScOpE DeAgGrO It WaS oBvIoUs Ai WoUlD KiLl YoU DeSeRvEd" 🤓   


lmao imagine defending shitty game mechanic because you are used to it
OP is pointing out that it’s un-fun that the AI enemies with almost twice as much HP as player characters & an ability to fire 3 bullets at once with pinpoint accuracy at enemies who’ve changed position can do so while strafing, pointfiring, and being shot. Of course there’s a way to run behind something and sit there for 90s until the robot forgets you were ever there and you start over, but is it too much to ask that the AI could just fuckin’ work? 

Sure, programming AI is hard, but reducing their health pools to be equal with players or perhaps EVER fixing the three-bullets-per-trigger-pull bug would be a good start. 

The AI in this game is one of the worst things about it, only navigable by following some mumbling dumbfuck’s YouTube guide on exactly where & how to cheese each particular Rogue/Boss on any given map, and BSG insists on adding more and more of these half-baked raid-enders -all the time.
The choices made by OP doesn’t justify AI being able to 100% accuracy a previously unknown player whilst strafing
Why are you acting like AI should be able to instantly head eyes someone ????
Go back to snorting pills degenerate.
has a flipping grizzly too
Stop defending shit programming. Just stop.
because they drink vodka with orange juice during their working time, they also showed that on stream.
Makes the AI play more like real people. Let's use this video as a baseline. With SAIN that AI would have had a random "personality" assigned to it. 

With a more aggressive personality he'd have his Nikes laced up ready to bum rush you. He would probably run up a bit closer and lean-peek you. Hell, they could even jump from around the corner after you. Ever seen an AI jump?

With a more passive personality it would have either waited for a chance to ambush you, waiting for you to get close before either blind-firing your direction or be pre-emptively holding the angle in cover. or just straight up ran away.

Truly anything is better than AI walking toward you sideways and insta headshotting you. But kicking you in the balls is just BSG's style.
Makes the game better. Still not perfect though. Just general ai improvements.
Sniping them from far away, right hand peeking specific angles, doors when inside. That's about it. 

Any regular 1v1 is a death sentence unles you legit hit a god tier first bullet headshot.
There’s a couple ways but they’re all really “cheese” strategies. Usually throwing a base near them will trigger a sprint and a voice line, and while they sprint they’re basically incapable of fighting. Other strat is doors, or holding crazy angles.
Nah look at his health top corner. When you are hit in blacked limb you can see the whole body turning red and more red with every bullet until you are dead
Im totally fine with them being a legitimate threat, just... not via aimbot.
Yep, Hunt Showdown does this very well and it works great.
They should just be there imho. No guns or anything, just be there.
Division 2 AI was actually decent for being a multiplayer game tbh.
S.T.A.L.K.E.R AI has pretty good moments.   


But besides those good moments, they'll sit at a campfire and eat 3 headshots while continuing to play their guitar.
Bad AI because it is too weak >>> Bad AI because it is too strong in a multiplayer game. There are always other players to present a serious threat, no game needs random autodeaths
SPT (Single player tarkov) paired with the SAIN mod makes AI actually fair
Most modern games have good AI, honestly. The thing about good AI is that you don't notice it until it's not there.
Yeah it’s got to be around 15, an issue with the skills for sure, fighting them in the daylight is ridiculous and my night raids were packed with players with thermals. I have one of those DSF flares so I’m going to try and assemble a small team and try and do it that way.
Weirdly I killed big pipe and bird eye on my first try but it didn’t count because I hadn’t completed the first part of the quest where you have to get close to the cottages. I got 50 million to spend so I’m just going to keep going.
You need to see "Goats" video if you don't believe it's cheaters.
Sounds like you’re joking but I legitimately have 5-6 FLIRs and have killed several people around cottage with them already. It definitely feels like hacking when you have an absurd vision advantage.

Number of FLIRs also doesn’t matter when you can straight up buy them from jaeger.
What are those two mods called?
name of mods?
loved the 3.6.0 update with gift codes, and I genuinely can't wait to mod some into the game
How difficult is it to fight scavs relative to normal Tarkov?
Oh, don't get me wrong, I have no hope anymore.  My last ember of hope was snuffed out during the Halloween event 2 years ago?  I think it was 2 years ago.  Remember the "be online!  amazing things are going to happen!!"  Then we're all sitting there for an hour, waiting, when eventually the "big event" takes place, day turns to night, it gets foggier so sniping is 100% off the table and scavs have pumpkin heads again.  Then there were some mutterings about how more was planned blah blah blah.  It's at that moment that I thought to myself that I have to let go of caring about the fate of Tarkov.  If it gets fixed, great, I'll happily play again.  If it doesn't?  Well, we'll just get more clown shows like Streets.  The most hyped FPS map of all time that landed with a wet flop.  Unplayable to almost everyone, rubber banding that the Michelin Man would be envious of, huge buildings with 3 rooms each that you can enter.  

It's all just.... whatever... I don't even know.  When you have devs showing up to live streams drunk or high or both, then taking a break mid stream while freaking out because the demos are all going badly to have "juice time" (which they've made a special graphic for btw, who makes a special graphic for a break [who has breaks during live streams??] in a live stream to go drink more) you know that the wings are off the plane and they're just riding that metal tube into the ground.
Might not be cheaters right now, a lot of thermals at night
I was standing on the hill by the truck on shoreline to the left of resort.

The goons tried to beam me from cottage through trees about 500+m away while I was looking in the opposite direction of them. What was my mistake? Existing on the same map? Neither of us had line of sight.
Imagine defending the busted AI this hard.
Hahahaha don’t look at the enemy great one
Sorry people don’t understand sarcasm.
just hold your gun behind your head and kill them with a no-look shot 🙄
That sucks
except now they see straight through bushes and trees and from miles away. Shits straight up broken.
Good bot.
He meant don’t fight AI like you fight people. “You don’t PVP AI”.
So what would you fix here? The AI should not shoot? Or miss you? Or take longer to find him as a target? 

I’m what way exactly do you change the AI behavior in this scenario without making them too easy to kill?
Idk. The AI is dogshit busted, I agree, but as to why players SHOULD, you're sneaking into a defended military outpost of ex-USECS. Why shouldn't you have to be careful?
thanks big man. really appreciate it. fuck i may have to do that for phat stash expansion. i have eod, do we know if the expansion is still worth it?
They have human function so idk what you mean 🤷
The AI can consistently, near 100% of the time, beam you in the face with a shitty 40 durability trash mod AK, from any distance while moving. That’s not good AI. It’s not the AI outplaying us either, it’s replacing actually engaging AI with artificial difficulty of inhuman aim and reaction speeds.
What do you mean? The game is meant to be realistic clearly. I don't know about you but in my super classified navy seal airborne marine special forces training they taught us how to jigglepeak and bunny hop.
Not to mention he shot the ai first which would aimpunch players but ai doesn’t suffer from that so he just loses
The rogue was already agro'd from a previous peek not shown in the clip, was already fixated on that spot, and when the rogue pushed forward. It had essentially already had the Los lined up
bro at night time i was near the construction site and i have no clue how they saw me but the grenade launcher rogue obliterated me. i measured it, i think it was something like 231 metres. in nighttime.
Yeah, but you so much as pop a half chub IRL and every one of them in a mile radius can 360 no-scope you in the fucking retinas again.
Any time you take good quad NVGs and a 762 Nato gun to lighthouse, expect to be killed by a cheater.
Yeah i should bring in some flirs and see all what this is all about it you ahahsah wahdhf dg
Got shot trough a door crack yeasterday, head eyes. Fuck scopes iron sights for the win i guess
Rogue and rouge are two different words entirely, and are not exchangeable. Aluminum and aluminium are two different spellings, both correct and interchangeable.
[removed]
Where in any of what I said, did I defend BSG's coding? You completely illiterate 40iq child.

It's irrelevant how you think the games coding should work, it's been this way for years and the OP made an absolutely dogshit decision within the confines of how the game actually works.

Deserved. Downvote away, doesn't bother me in the slightest. OP played like shit and died.
[deleted]
You can think what you want about the AI and you could write a 140 page novella about the ways in which BSG could change it but that's all completely irrelevant.

This is how the AI works, this is how it's always worked, this is how it will continue to work. OP played like shit within the confines of the video game as it currently stands, regardless of how you think the game should work. 

If you need youtube guides to work out how to play the game that says it all. Try just actually playing and learning yourself instead of immediately seeking advice from others at the smallest sign of difficulty/challenge/uncertainty. 

Dying isn't a big deal in the slightest, learn from the mistake and adapt.
Yes but the ai also doesn't have guns lol. But that is the prise it should have.
Most modern shooters are either incredibly easy, have bullet sponge enemies, or rely on a streamlined trial-and-error system in single player or coop that allows you to retry the encounter within a few seconds of dying.

Completely different than Tarkov.
My man good shit
I have he doesn't use any kind of real statistical analysis, he's using a very small pool of anecdotal data and jumping to massive conclusions. I've played 4 wipes. My brother has Kappa. Between me and him we've got 9000 hours. We both have seen and or been killed by less than 10 blatant cheaters all wipe. That doesn't mean cheaters don't exist because that's just my anecdotal experience. But the idea that 60% of games have a cheater is patently absurd.


Yes cheaters are out there. But the ones that kill other players are almost ALWAYS blatantly cheating like they fly around the map etc. I've been killed by 3 blatant cheaters all wipe. 1 was named BanMePlz69 and literally was invisible and could fly. The other was a guy on factory who killed me after I had ratted silently in one spot for 15 minutes and he shot me through a wall. I added him and he asked if I wanted a carry that's how blatant he was. And both of them got banned. My brother has ran into 3-5 of the blatantly cheating flying guys and he has Kappa this wipe. 


The RMT chinese farmers that use hacks to farm for rmt play exclusively on west for the most part, and BSG's efforts to limit RMT have significantly hurt RMT.


Cheaters were a much bigger problem last wipe, and the wipe before that. There was so much RMT farming going on I know because I met cheaters through the official discord and they usually were using it to farm RMT or farm carrys.
the ai mod is called SAIN's
SAIN's for the ai
I just got prefired in a secluded corner in shoreline where the village is(not the sanitar one)while afk for like 15 mins watching a video and dude storms in doesnt check any corners besides the one im in and starts shooting before i even see his shoulder come around the corner
Well you seen, you used your third eye and you should have made it blind.
That is exactly what I was going for, good job. Yes, you did it.  wait
Have them not lock on for one thing, you can also adjust their accuracy, or time it takes to acquire target. Lots of things. The single player mod tarkov people have many mods that mess with ai and provide a MUCH better experience.
Sounds like you are lacking the AI skill
Yeah, I was an Arctic seal. It's kind of like navy seals but cooler and makes funny noises. We learned to take 5 stimulants and be drugged out all the time rubbing lip balm on my face and bunny hopping across door ways to peak my enemies
I know WHY it happened. 

Im saying it should not happen because its dogshit gameplay.
Rogue AI doesn’t get reduced vision as it gets darker. It is binary, they either have full vision or have their reduced night vision, nothing in between. 21:45 ￼— 05:00 they cannot see you at construction, you just werent there at what the rogues consider “night”.

Source: hundreds of nighthouse raids this wipe
I think they increased his range because I remember he didn't shoot unless you were closer to the beach last wipe but this wipe I've been killed close to the construction site by the grenade launcher.
Soon they won't be, don't worry
gotta love a 'realistic tactical shooter' where holding an angle against a sprinting opponent is 'F-' level play
You're full of it.

What the hell is an "ego peak" anyway?
They hated him because he was right
You mad
You probably got to level 30 and decided to become an expert
Honestly you have a fair point, the guide makers put in the work & without them you’d have no choice but to die to 1100HP laser aimbot AI again and again until you found whatever BS cheese works on them. I avoid AI bosses like the plague ‘cause I just don’t think they’re fun, but you’re right, somebody has to make those guides so that the content is more accessible.
The guy just said “it is how it is” lmao.    
Ima keep it real with you chief, it is completely irrelevant what **you** think about people complaining and giving feedback. On the contrary to yours “git gud”, the    
>140 page novella about the ways in which BSG could change it

Is very much relevant and valuable. If you didn’t notice yet we’re all here playing “closed” beta, and the first google search will tell you that *”Beta tests are used to identify any remaining bugs or usability issues and gather feedback on the overall user experience”*. So that feedback is very much needed. And if it’s too hard for you comprehend the idea of “giving feedback” or say anything besides “try actually playing”, then many people will kindly ask you to fuck right off as even the simplest “AI bad, pls fix” complaint brings more to the table than anything you wrote so far
yeah, if you need guides you should just go back and replay the tutorial
Timmies will downvote, but this death is deserved.
No, it's absolutely not different. Literally the only thing stopping Tarkov from being *exactly* what you described is the cranked up AI damage/aim and the multiplayer format.

> have bullet sponge enemies, or rely on a streamlined trial-and-error system

This is already the case though? Higher tier enemies difficulty comes entirely from arbitrarily buffed health pools and aim, plus the entire PVE gameplay loop is built around trial and error as you figure out how to exploit the AI.

None of this makes for good AI. It's just bandaids and artificial difficulty.
RMT is a subsection of cheaters but you have tons more people still offering carries, rage cheaters, and people who just cheat for the hell of it to get an advantage. Most people use radar but plenty of non-flying aimbotters as well.

Acting like the RMT changes cut cheating way down is just foolish and wrong.
> and literally was invisible and could fly.

If he was invisible, how did you know he was flying?
> Between me and him we've got 9000 hours. We both have seen and or been killed by less than 10 blatant cheaters all wipe.

haha
too many words... Sounds like cope
Bro typed a whole ESSAY like bro ain’t nobody got time to read all that shit!!
Okay, those are the blatant cheaters that are easy to detect and ban. How about all of the less obvious stuff, like ESP and radars? Or how about the people who selectively use aimbot?
I agree with both of you. It just needs some better fine tune accuracy. But a rogue should not be as easy as a scav. Did OP say they were already engaged prior? Big no no. If you get engaged you have to wait for them to deaggro or you will get fucked no matter what.
Much better but also much “easier” yea? The fixes you speak of, taking longer to acquire the target, not “locking on” and adjusting their accuracy AKA make them miss more shots. These are all things that make the AI just plain easier to defeat, which is not their goal and basically loot Piñatas. More fun for some but not for others… 

The idea, like most things in Tarkov, is much easier said than done. Actually making the AI more fun to fight but not compromising their difficulty is insanely hard to accomplish. Same argument as “Fix spawns we are too close!” It’s just so much easier on paper than realistically fixing. 

So you’re not wrong in saying it needs fixed… but you’re wrong for thinking it’s some easy issue with simple solutions like you named. Much more complicated.
You're absolutely correct. 

I'll take this advice and go about making sure I have the same capabilities as the AI. 

Anybody know how I can go about getting 0 weapon sway, 0 recoil, extrasensory perception so that I can track players through though solid objects on the other side of the map, and the ability to lock my aim to specific body parts?
Honestly the AI should have an idea of where is at if he was already aggro'd they just need to tune down their accuracy a tiny bit. Their's a mod for offline that does this wonderfully but I can't remember what it's called.
Oh, it plays terribly, no disputing that. For the time being, all we can do is cheese or flip a coin.

I did see on the updated roadmap for Ai improvements in the August wipe. So hopefully something comes of that
yeah probably was between like 19:00. still dark as piss but not nighttime apparently 😂
Ive seen people get grenade lauchered all the way at Informant’s beachhouse. Absolutely ridiculous
Why won't they be? What is your reasoning for thinking this?
Your mistake was in thinking that Tarkov is remotely realistic or a tactical shooter. It's a hardcore looter shooter filled with gameisms, the only thing it has in relation to real life is the gun parts/names.
ego peak is a very common term in fps games and is actually extremely self explanatory if you use your brain.
Guy who doesn't even know what an ego peak is tries to discuss nuances of an FPS game.

100% reddit.
Ikr the keyboard warrior over here lol
Fucking Cultists dude.. I’ve hunted Bloodhounds, Sanitar and his guards, Reshala and his Guards, and Shturman and his Guards but I’ll be fuckin damned if I could ever kill a fucking cultist. Impossible (pretty much) to see on thermals, they literally rat in the hardest to see places, run fucking fast, have night vision, are silent, and are as skilled as a Rogue or Bloodhound. Like FUCK cultists dude…
Yeah all us who played the game for years before there even existed a wiki or guides at all just gave up and didn't play till some lord and savior streamer came and saved us.

Critical thinking is dead. Long live blind obedience.
> Higher tier enemies difficulty comes entirely from arbitrarily buffed health pools

They're far from being bullet sponges, even a juiced up Sanitar will die in one hit from a shotgun.

> as you figure out how to exploit the AI.

But even once you figure out how to exploit it, a lot of the time you have to sort of tip-toe around the encounter while doing w/e is required for the cheese. All while other players are likely also trying to kill the boss. That's what leads to some of the most intense and hilarious moments in Tarkov.

It's not good AI, but it does drive players towards the type of game situations that are seemingly exactly what BSG wants. And it's fun, which is why we all keep coming back to the game wipe after wipe. I don't think Tarkov is a case either of being "fun *except* for the darn AI"! I think the jankiness and ridiculous threat levels that can come from the AI adds to the game in a weird way.
I agree . I think most people that cheat do it because they don't like losing.
Because we could see tracers flying from a spot in the sky at us following us through the air all the way down shoreline beach
>I can't read
How melted is your attention span that two paragraphs are too much for you to read? Fucking zoomers, man.
Reading words is indeed difficult
Who likes the way AI are right now? I'd rather it be too easy than be like it is now, you will always have players for difficulty as well 

And even then I really don't think it would be too easy. I'm a tarkov vet and have played alot of the game, got kappa etc. And even with that on the single player mod I still die and it still has some challenge.

Not to mention everything has just been nerfed and shit on to the point of being unfun. Raiders dropping shit ammo/shit gear/ shit broken guns. It wouldn't be as bad if tarkov didn't have such a dumb tiered system for effectiveness (like the realism mod) but it does.

I dunno. Just doesn't feel good all around
Hax, you're looking for hax.
if we're using piss as a darkness measurement perhaps a doctor's visit is in order
The earliest you want to start queuing up for nighthouse is 21:30, but if you have a quick load and a close spawn you can still get bonked by a rogue; so be careful there.
I got killed there just the other day
Your mistake is egocentric abuse of shared game knowledge.

You miss the point of this post. Bad AI is still bad AI - regardless of loophole mechanics.
an ego peek is putting yourself in a vulnerable situation where you know an enemy will probably be and engaging in a 50/50 duel. In CS "I'm gonna ego peek mid with an awp" is just busting out into the area and trying to snap onto a player and kill them, as opposed to working around the map playing angles and flanks.

Holding an angle behind cover on an AI is in no way an "ego peek" in any definition of the term.
Yes, the meaning is obvious.
I just don't like the term, especially when it's misused.
What an ego explaination lol
I love how 420prayit and 88vicodin spread their immense knowledge
>Guy who doesn't even know what an ego peak

Lol. It's a PEEK. You spelled it wrong like six times. An "ego peak" is nothing.
ahh, my favorite hiking spot, *Ego Peak*
I can surmise what it means, if that's what you're implying, I just don't see the applicability here.

Regardless though.
OP wasn't peaking, or " ego peaking" or whatever. He was holding an angle.
I don't need to be a Super CSGO Operator to tell the difference.

I reiterate my previous point.

You're full of it.
No. An ‘ego peek’ is you peeking heaven with AK when you know there’s an AWP there but want to try to get the kill anyways cuz he just domed two of your friends. Holding an angle in a tactical fps against AI is not an ‘ego peek’.
Bloodhounds are broken, too. I usually don't get killed by AI much since I cheese them and know the safe ways. But last night, my team spawned sunken on shoreline. Pushed up to go into the village to fight the goons. And I saw 4 things on thermal. I was almost 200m away, I believe. I went prone behind a big tree and right peaked and lined up a headshot. Before i could shoot I was dead.  9x19 PST.  Fucking pst from that far. 4 of them to the face
Im sorry life was so hard for you back in the day old timer

thanks for laying the ground work for all those guides so I didn’t have to waste tons of time figuring it out myself
Too many words again try harder bub
Ohhhhhhhh, ok. That makes sense.
He meant "dark ass piss" because when you piss from your ass its usually pretty dark.
> Regardless though. OP wasn't peaking, or " ego peaking" or whatever. He was holding an angle. I don't need to be a Super CSGO Operator to tell the difference.

This is correct in every community. Holding an angle is never considered an ego peek (or peak). Ego peeking would be what the AI did, running out unfavourable into someone holding an angle hopping to kill quick to survive. Then again that isn't even a peak but a full on run out lmao.
Only broken in the daytime. Nighttime at times they get sketchy for no reason but 90% of my experiences were eazy cheesing with a FLIR and medium range.
Thanks for being one of the guide following timmy's that are just a free kill every raid because they can't do a single thing for themselves except try and emulate what they see on youtube. 

Also I don't remember ever saying the game was hard at all but hey, you said it so it must be true, my mistake. I can see your reading comprehension skills are as adequate as your critical thinking ones, ignorance is bliss I suppose.
relax nerd
You are not a real person
I hope there are better days coming for you, buddy
F.E.A.R. introduced the GOAP (Goal Oriented Action Planning)  A.I. for smarter enemies and to this day still has some of the best A.I. and has even been used in the most recent Tomb Raider games, nearly 15 years later.

&#x200B;

Steam accually used a clever system in Half-Life 2 that made enemies more likly to attack you from the nearest ledge in order order for you to feel more like an action movie badass knocking people to their demise, good example of smarter not being better.
>I know about one example: Oblivion. What I heard is that each of the thousand NPC had their own needs and wants and that was what determining their routine for the day.

They ended up dumbing it down because they kept running in to problems.  One story often told is that one NPC's AI determined that it was time to rake the leaves, only the nearest rake was in the possession of another NPC.  So the AI determined the easiest way to get it was to *murder the NPC and take it from his corpse*.  Five minutes later the player wanders in and there's a dude raking leaves and a corpse in the corner, the player wondering what the hell just happened.

So they cut it down, as they couldn't get the priorities working correctly such that they wouldn't murder other friendly NPCs for items they needed.

That's the story, at least.  Not sure how true it is,
[removed]
if you want to talk about Oblivion: AI has day schedule that makes it look more alive and preferences in combat that makes it try to act more efficiently. by default, the latter isn't tuned very well, but there are several AI mods that does nothing but adjust already existing parameters to make combat AI much more dangerous.

i don't remember everything, but here's a list of things an AI can do in unmodded Oblivion and could do with some fixing: pick upserior weapon, switch between melee and ranged when appropriate, sidestep attacks, use consumable items whenever it thinks it is appropriate, retreat to survive or retreat to heal, look around for a player that managed to conseal themselves after combat, take better equipment from corpses, stay at a distance if it can't handle player in melee or not engage at all if it knows it can't win. the things it can't perform are any kind of team tactics and surprise attacks.

day schedule, on the other hand, already looks alright for the most part(some addons introduce schedule bugs for certain NPCs IIRC) - most sleep at night, work at day and relax at evening. some are also set to travel to their "friends" on certain days of the week or month. some activities are also set to change NPC's clothing, so, say, a knight won't be sleeping with their armor on or a guard won't have their torch out during the day hours.

the best part about all this is that AI doesn't have to be pointed to specific things it needs to interact with or use, althought it can be done when desired - NPCs can find free seats in a select tavern on their own, they can roam around forest freely looking for deers to hunt, they can find and steal food if they must eat and are ok with breaking the law.
To bring up something that isn't FEAR, Halo has some neat nuance to enemies throughout the series, like how if you get an elite down to low health, they may aggro and pull out their sword. Or, I think in Halo 2, if you kill all brutes in an area except for one (or was it just if you did enough damage to them?), the last one will go super crazy, throw their weapon away and run straight for you in a fit of blind rage. Or how Hunters will moan and attack far more aggressively when their partner is killed.

&#x200B;

And of course, there's the classic grunts running away in fear after their squad leader elite is killed. It's all of the stuff like that, that give them a lot of character. Heck, elites and brutes can even hijack your own vehicles just like you can to them. It gives off a feeling like they have the same capability as you.

&#x200B;

There's lots of other little stuff I'm sure I'm missing too, like suppressive fire, or the flood reanimating dead bodies in Halo 3. A lot of this stuff was probably inspired by Half-Life 1's AI too, which is like the granddaddy of this sort of thing.
No one is gonna mention ALife in the STALKER series? They actually had to tone it down for the release. 

But basically the AI would play their own choose-their-own-adventure game (with branching choices) and these were done on a small scale, on an event basis, not one long storyline. So NPCs would interact with the world and other NPCs and make choices in these events.

Not sure if that makes sense, but what this simple system resulted in, is a world were NPCs played the game along with you, so it all felt natural and it would organically create small subplots.

You could see a group of scavengers meet some military in a base, get in a fight, the winners would then scavenge the bodies for loot, then continue to their scavenging location, only to be met by some hungry mutant dogs there that were looking for food. They had to tone it down, because some NPCs might finish the storyline before the player did.

Edit: Dwarf Fortress is also a good one
That's really hard to say. Good AIs in games are not "good" AIs, but an AI made to look good.

Usually when players say an AI is good and then you hear the devs talk about it, it's just some clever scripts & stuff like that.

You could potentially make a super advanced AI that kinda thinks like an human etc. but in the end it's way "easier" to make something specific, usually for better results too. And of course you can't just train an AI to be good, because it'll be TOO good. In the end is more a question of balancing than making a "good" AI, so definitely not something limited by the technology.

Stealth game are often criticized for their "dumb" AIs for example, but it's not because good AI would be hard to make but because the game simple wouldn't be fun without rules and limitations to the AIs' capacities. And yeah, I'm sure players don't even notice the most advanced AIs.

&#x200B;

Check out this talk, I think it gives a good overview of the idea of AIs in games [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1xWg54mdQos](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1xWg54mdQos) 

&#x200B;

As for me, I really like systemic games, so any AI made to work that way is cool to me (like enemies picking up what's around them to fight with, stuff like that)
Sims is the obvious example here. They have complex behaviour patterns, but then again, the whole game's premise is based around it.

Black&White comes to mind. You can teach your creature and your subjects, and they all also spontaneously learn stuff.

The Fable series (yes, another Lionhead game) tried to implement an advanced AI to all the random NPCs, their preferences, etc., but it was a bit too simplistic. In the end, the end result wasn't in my opinion as nice as something you'd see in Gothic (where NPCs have set daily routines which is normal nowadays).

F.E.A.R.'s and Half-Life combat AI is excellent.

Can't think of anything else noteworthy. This vexes me.
Oblivion's NPCs didn't have AI, they had unique scripts. The actual AI was dumb as shit.

FEAR is a game which accidentally had good AI thanks to a small programming bug which made enemies very likely to flank you and otherwise engage with you. I'm not sure it counts if it's an accident, but in FEAR a lot of the enemy behavior is completely unscripted.

Metal Gear Solid as a series generally has some pretty good AI on the higher difficulty settings. MGS2/3 are especially notable for how good they are given the constraints of putting the AI into a PS2 game.

The problem with AI is not that we CAN'T make good AI, it's that making a good AI generally makes for a very un-fun game. Enemies are obstacles for the player to overcome, and an enemy which is smarter and more aware than the young/drunk/high/tired player at the end of their day is not a fun obstacle, it's an annoying one.
The thing about an AI that's smarter than a player, is it's pretty much indistinguishable from cheating.

What players really seem to want is predictable AI, so they can feel smart for being better than it. They want to know what the AI is "thinking", this is what FEAR did so well. Good communication with the player, and a play area designed to exploit it. Pretty much all stealth games have a way to tell the player they've been spotted, or are about to be spotted, as another example.
The most recent example that I think wow'd me are the imps from Doom 2016.  Specifically the ones that are tasked to run away and hide from the player and use ranged attacks.  I know it's just a trick, but it's a really good trick.

Also after listening to the ai design in the noclip documentary, I thought the token system was a clever idea.  Basically all the enemies share regenerating "attack tokens" which must be spent to attack the player.  In this way the rate of attack can be controlled and so the player isn't just overwhelmed.  And the enemies have their own little token marketplace in which they can trade tokens with one another to create more sensible and dramatic attack scenarios for the player.
The thing about "good" AI is that it is totally reliant on player perception. So AI doesn't have to actually be smart or dynamic, it just has to appear that way. It also needs to be fun.

I'm not aware of any game that doesn't have the classic "Oh I just saw a guy get shot in the face right beside me with an arrow. Oh, ten seconds have passed, I am now no longer worried about this dead man. Let me stand right next to where he died"

But think about how annoying it would be if AI were actually vigilant like a soldier in real life, or were actually perceptive like a human being. You'd be hard-pressed to do anything stealthily.

FEAR AI is always brought up because they made the enemies appear to be extremely smart, but in reality it's a bunch of "If this, then that" logic that is accompanied by the soldiers shouting and good level design based around their AI.

Like you mentioned, NPC's having daily routines rarely, if ever, is noticed by the player or affects them in a meaningful way. The type of AI you need is completely related to the type of game you're making.

An AI that had actual military tactical techniques and good aim would more than likely be overwhelming and un-fun for the player.

TBH I can't even think of the last time I was actually impressed with the AI in a game.
You should check out: 

\- Elizabeth from Bioshock Infinite for a compelling companion NPC,  the AI is an integral part of why she's a beloved game character;

\- the AI of Alien Isolation for an example of opponent AI. This game cheats, but does it in a way that keeps you entertained;

\- many people don't realize just how good this is, but FIFA's AI does a great job at moving the players that are not in direct control of a human; over the years, this stopped being a significant problem and plays look/feel more natural because of the improvements in how the AI understands plays in order to position players that are not on the ball - it's the kind of improvement that goes unnoticed because it's so subtle, but good enough not to break imersion anymore;

I think this discussion should cover strategy games more than RPGs, shooters, action games. The biggest improvements would have to be related to StarCraft 2 and it shows true evolution unlike most other games. First, there's the game's AI that allows the player to go against basic version of strategies they might encounter online. The ability to practice against this with the AI is basically unprecedented in other games. The AI is not that good overall, it's better than in any strategy game, but it has it's obvious limitations - hey, it still has to run on the same machine that has to run the game smoothly for the player too. Not an easy task and the game is complex enough to cover properly, it's very impressive what they've achieved. 

And then there's AlphaStar. Look, if you're really interested about the topic, you have to read or watch videos about what the DeepMind team did. We basically have an AI that can beat professional players in Starcraft 2. This is relevant as it explains to you why it was so difficult to advance as fast as it was expected 20 years ago, but it also shows that we now have the technology to create AIs that can execute top level tasks, at the same level as a human can. And while the training of that AI might require a large number of machines, the binary that you need for your playthroughs are not too demanding for a single machine to handle. I'm definitely seeing some interesting development because of what the AlphaStar team achieved.
I thought the AI in Doom (2016) was good...I saw some video on ít and it seemed really clever.... But I've never really payed attention to game design while playing
They movement in RAGE is great, not sure if that counts.

Tropico's citizens are pretty complex with likes/dislikes, specific jobs, specific homes, relationships, and allegiances.
This is hearsay from when I worked at Ubisoft. The bad guys in I think it was Rainbow Six Vegas has very complex human-like behavior AIs. However, once it was published, the players just saw "oh, a guy is over there shoot him" and they decided it wasn't worth investing in.
Persona 3. That game didn't let you manually control your party members, but the AI was pretty good and never fucked up to the point where I died. If I died it was because of my own mistake or that my levels/equipment/persona was too bad.
A lot of the problems with modern games are that they are server-based, which means even if they're not fully-fledged MMOs they're still bound by the technical limitations of the servers.

And we already know that advanced AI calculations are expensive, if we also now have a server-based game like, The Division, Destiny, Anthem or any of its ilk then you end up with similar AI limitations as MMOs.

So essentially because more and more devs decide to go Server-based we end up moving a little bit backwards in terms of AI-advancement and technology.

That said, it'll be interesting to see what Cloud-Gaming/Streaming will bring to the mix, if we can add everybodys computational power together somehow, it might be interesting to see what the future brings. :)
[removed]
I remember at the time it came out Far Cry (the first one) was known for it's clever AI. I found a nice video about it: [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=93bPTrlknIY](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=93bPTrlknIY)

At the time all of these things features were really impressive.
I think the best Ai would be Ai from CS 1.6 



But again it greatly depends on the map... for example if the map is dust 2 and the creators of the map are really skilled... the bots are really good
> Steam accually used a clever system in Half-Life 2 that made enemies more likly to attack you from the nearest ledge in order order for you to feel more like an action movie badass knocking people to their demise.

And thus, Dark Messiah of Might & Magic.
There's a paper written in 2006 about F.E.A.R IA: http://alumni.media.mit.edu/%7Ejorkin/gdc2006_orkin_jeff_fear.pdf
It’s not the first time I hear about F.E.A.R. as an example. It’s true that their AI seemed very good…

…except for the fact that they keep SCREAMING their position and what they’re going to do to the player.

(It’s a joke. I know it was done to make the game more fun. But still, it has always bugged me.)
Valve
One of my favourite things in Oblivion is that the guards had 95 aggression (on a scale of 1-100) but 100 responsibility. They were basically all extremely disciplined psycho murderers, and the way they behaved in game reflected it perfectly.
I love that story. I hope it's true
There's also another story of the devs finding the corpse of a prisoner that was not supposed to be dead in an open cell. They were trying to fix it when they noticed the prisoner was always murdered by the guards. It turns out, once the guards run out of food, they kill this poor fucker for his'.
Constantly impressed at how well that Alien worked in that game.
They also gave the alien some light learning capabilities. Or at least the illusion of such. Overusing the flamethrower could cause it to start to charge through the flames, it might pay less attention to noisemakers, etc
TIL
I loved the variability in Halo's enemies/AI, that's probably why I was able to play the campaigns so much before I had XBL. I know nothing about how advanced the AI actually was, but the devs did a great job at creating dynamic and reactive encounters.
Enemies in Stalker would even sneak behind you while you are busy fighting their friends.

They also looted bodies, helped their allies after combat, would hide in non-solid obstacles (like bushes).

@Edit

Zombies in CoP wouldn't attack you if you were just walking near them, but jogging (default movement) would alert them.
The crazy flanking/CQC manoeuvres those npcs would pull off is just astounding.
There was a discussion on this sub a while ago about guards and how they react in stealth game. I think it would be indeed a mistake to make them too smart but on the other hand I think it would be more interesting to randomize their reaction (for instance showing fear when the player has already dispatched all the other guards or pretending to not see you because he’s not paid enough for this shit) and react to different stimuli (for instance if you cleared a level almost completely, the last guard would notice it).

It would encourage the player to use alternate solution instead of always using the same old method: isolating and dispatching.
God I wish someone would try a game in the vein of Black and White again. Raising your creature was such a unique and fun experience. I had a lion that was just a sweetheart in the town, but outside of the walls he would fuck anybody up.
My friends discovered that if you punished your creature constantly/arbitrarily, it would eventually become neurotic and too scared to do anything. In hindsight, it's a little depressing how realistic that is...
[deleted]
>The thing about an AI that's smarter than a player, is it's pretty much indistinguishable from cheating.

Only if cleverness actually determines who wins. Most video games are very asymmetric so that doesn't have to be the case. E.g. no matter how genius a small squad of Grunts in Halo get, Master Chief has such an overwhelming advantage in stats that a good human player will be able to defeat them.

And besides, why are you even talking about beating the player? As a designer, you decide what your AI's goals are. If you think outside the box a bit, you can easily give AI a different optimization target than winning really hard. E.g. the AI in Left 4 Dead.

Then finally, even if the computer *is* playing the same game as the human and they *are* trying to win, even then it can be a great experience. I have the most fun in competitive games when I'm playing against an opponent who does some things better than me and some things worse than me, and I can learn from them or try to leverage where I'm better to defeat them. You could make an AI target this experience.

A stupid AI that makes horrible decisions but just gets a lot of bonuses and therefore is moderately competitive vs me will never teach me anything and also quickly stops being fun to play against.
Not really. Cheating is seeing player moves through fog of war or getting bonuses etc. AI that can win without having an edge over the player is good AI.
>The thing about an AI that's smarter than a player, is it's pretty much indistinguishable from cheating.

This gets trotted out every time this discussion comes up, but I never see any evidence for the claim. What games had AI that was so smart that everyone thinks it's cheating?
That was from Horizon Zero Dawn, right? Probably one of the best-feeling combat systems out there IMO. I'm excited to see what the Death Stranding team is doing with that engine.
Dwarf Fortress has astonishingly complex AI under the hood. As it's half game, half simulation the whole game is in itself one big giant AI composed of countless tiny threads of individual AIs.

Even just playing the game you don't really get a sense of it. But even a single dwarf has an incredibly convoluted linearity of personal inclinations defined by their past trauma and experiences.
I'm curious, but do you have any background in dev or game dev in particular?
but they have aimbots and wall hacks.
You bastard, now I have to play it again.
Also known as "Sir Kicksalot Deathboot and the Conveniently Placed Spiked Wall".
You know everyone talks about the ledge kicking in that game, but my favorite thing is easily smashing chairs over people's heads...and rocks...and barrels. And throwing the occasional cup just for laughs.
A big part of the reason guards/enemies are so vocal is so players know what's going on. 

If they're 'smart' and flank you while being silent, players just feel like it was an unfair ambush, or maybe it was just random bad luck. If an enemy yells "I'm gonna flank" and they get to see them moving around or they can choose to counter the flanker. They appreciate what's going on and what the AI 'thought process' is.

Then there's the question of if the player actually knows the difference between that all being scripted per-encounter, or if the AI recognizes locations and routes in a level and thinks about using a side route while player attention is elsewhere, when not to just attack. A lot of games are smoke and mirrors, and it might be a better use of time to disguise the scripted approach.
> 
> …except for the fact that they keep SCREAMING their position and what they’re going to do to the player.

It's so the player realizing what they're doing and doesn't think the AI is just a cheating bastard, which is what playtesters were saying before they added in the barks.
Interesting to see that almost all the people answering to your thread talk. About combat.

What about npcs? There are no smart or interesting npcs in video games.

I believe the industry does not know how to do smart AI (non combat).
maybe you should play csgo
imagine if it happened in real life.
>l think it would be indeed a mistake to make them too smart but on the other hand I think it would be more interesting to randomize their reaction (for instance showing fear when the player has already dispatched all the other guards or pretending to not see you because he’s not paid enough for this shit) and react to different stimuli (for instance if you cleared a level almost completely, the last guard would notice it).

If I recall correctly, the Arkham games do this already. The last guard, or few guards, get really nervous and start frantically looking for you. Especially if instead of taking down the henchman, you hang them upside-down, that increases their unease.
Too much randomization is actually not that great of an idea for AI in stealth games.

As with any game, there need to be patterns that the player can learn to recognize and exploit in order to become better. Obviously a small degree of randomness is important to have, and there is nothing wrong with guards that have complex behavior, but that behavior needs to be consistent and predictable. This allows the player to devise strategies and techniques.

When a player fails at an encounter or a task in a game, they need to be able deduce why exactly they failed so they can attempt to correct that error on subsequent attempts. To many random guard behaviors, such as a guard randomly deciding that he isn’t compensated enough to pursue you, will leave the player confused as to wether their success was a fluke when that guard decides to chase them on subsequent attempts.
Black and White 2 was my jam.
There is a nuance.  


Script generally means it will do a predetermine sequence of actions  
Where as many means by AI, something that will "determine" the sequence of actions to take
That's not how an AI works.

AI makes a spontaneous decision based on the events around them, which is the exact opposite of performing predetermined tasks on a schedule unless interrupted.

To use the infamous cheating NPC example...

In Oblivion, the NPC will cheat on his wife like clockwork unless the player interferes. There is no AI decision being made, he's just following a predetermined set of tasks. If it were an AI making this decision, the NPC would be cheating whenever his wife NPC was away, at varied times based on the wife NPC actions and the availability of the mistress NPC. It would be spontaneous, not predetermined.

Think of it like the difference between an enemy's actions in Metal Gear Solid before and after interacting with the guards. Before you interact with them, they will follow a set patrol route. No AI there. However if Snake taps on a wall or gets caught, their actions are now dependent on what is happening and what they can do in response. That part is AI.
Well, I wouldn't say it's cheating, but I don't agree with you either.

Good AI in my opinion can be broken down into two categories.

1.  Technically good AI.  This is the AI that can win without getting an edge.  This is actually incredibly easy to create and implement, but will be viewed by most people as terrible AI.  Why?  Because your average person is stupid.  Like, really, really, stupid.  The AI will flank, work as a team, etc., and dominate the player.  Just play any first person shooter to verify this.  You'll see people making tons of dumb mistakes that should always be avoided, and then they'll be complaining about the other team cheating, when the fault really resides on their end.

2. AI that's just slightly worse than the player.  Now this is incredibly difficult to program.  This is what most people want.  They want to be able to win, with feeling like they just squeaked out a victory.  First though, this type of AI can be exploited.  I.e. Need for Speed was notorious for having rubber banding AI.  On multiple occasions people noticed that they'd lose if they drove practically flawlessly, but would win if they acted like idiots the first portion of the race and then drove flawlessly.  How can an AI adjust to this?  Second, how do you just how good a player is, just to be slightly worse?
Offhand, I know FFT Calculators are so amazingly smart that for Crystal Calc SCCs, the general advice is to put the game on autobattle.
[deleted]
Exactly why I love the Rock It Launcher and Junk Jet in Fallout
https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/TheComputerIsACheatingBastard

Don't thank me guys
They do, but it's a pointless waste of resources.

99.9% of players won't appreciate the difference between a smart, non-combat AI and a dumb one. Hell, even smart combat AIs routinely get dumbed down because it turns out that fighting enemies smarter than you when they also outnumber you is a bad time.
Yes and they will also adapt to the tactics you use. Keep swinging from gargoyles? They'll destroy them or booby trap them. You keep using vents to get them? They'll blow them up with a grenade. They will lay down mines and turrets and stuff to hinder your mobility. It's awesome.
True, I wasn't thinking about this example specifically but that's a good point.
>will leave the player confused as to wether their success was a fluke when that guard decides to chase them on subsequent attempts.

But there’s also the problem of a player that becomes to good at the game, they end up having no challenge because patterns become predictable.
Exactly what I was about to point out.
AI isn't making up any new actions. "AI" in every game is working from a predetermined sequence of actions. At a very basic level, it's a series of if/then statements, aka a script.
The difference is the schedule.

The actions are still predetermined.  The enemies didn't come up with their action on the spot, they react to one of several predetermined stimuli with one of several different predetermined actions.

AI in games is a lot less spontaneous than you're making it out to be.
> unless the player interferes. 

At which point the behavior changes.

NPC behavior in every single game will remain unchanged absent player intervention.
I ask because I was wondering where you got the idea about "studios have to make a choice between keeping up with current graphics trends, and having very good AI".

I don't think it's down to limited processing power. I'd probably put it more down to the amount of time devs have to actually develop satisfying AI. Modern gaming consoles / PCs have such an overabundance of memory and processing power that it doesn't tend to be the limiting factor any more.
I don't think so

Populate the gta world with an AI that can have a meaningful conversation with me. That tells me about the day. That goes buy an umbrella when it rains, make friends, etc.....


Then we ll see
Ok thanks. It's been a few years since I played an Arkham game, I had forgotten about that
That is why you want multiple enemy types that exhibit a variety of behaviors, rather than enemies that are merely random.

New enemy types can be introduced over time, and those enemies can be arranged in new configurations in order to match the player’s learning curve.
Yep a script can be a full ai, but generally speaking when we talk about ai, we talk about the architecture/algorithm that use those if/else. Because by your definition every software ever created is a script and an ai. Thus that definition is not that useful.

I'm an ai programmer :)
This is just completely wrong. AlphaGo for example is playing games that no one has ever seen or thought of before (because of the massive action space of Go) and even plays moves that human experts consider to be innovative. By what stretch of the imagination is this a predetermined sequence of actions?

The only thing you were right about is that a scripted sequence can indeed be a form of AI.
> The actions are still predetermined. The enemies didn't come up with their action on the spot, they react to one of several predetermined stimuli with one of several different predetermined actions.
> 
> AI in games is a lot less spontaneous than you're making it out to be.

Which is how people react to stimuli. If you're a guard in a facility and you come across footsteps, you investigate because that's your job. If you come across an intruder, you attempt to deal with them. If they react with force, you react in kind, or maybe you'll flee if you're wounded. Depending on the area you're in, you might use a skid with boxes on it for concealment if you're attacked so it's harder for your attacker to accurately shoot at you, or retreat to a doorway through a brick wall for cover so that the bricks can soak up the gunfire.

AI in games is a lot better at mimicking a human response than you're pretending, if it's done right. Several games do so.
Being deliberately obtuse, are we?
It also stands out to me that the people making graphics are going to be a different discipline to the AI team. Seriously, look at the credits for any modern game and it's a huge amount of people involved, it's not the 90's when you might be lucky to have a dozen people.

And definitely agreed about overabundance of processing power. People have been saying the consoles or 'toaster' low spec PCs are holding things like AI back, but the some of the common examples of impressive AI are all well over a decade old and even the most modest modern hardware will play them without a problem.

AI seems more like a design/implementation problem fitting it into the gameplay than it does a processing power problem.
[deleted]
>Populate the gta world with an AI that can have a meaningful conversation with me. That tells me about the day. That goes buy an umbrella when it rains, make friends, etc.....

That's a lot of work for what is basically going to wind up as a gimmick.

Maybe 0.1% (or even less) of the players who play GTAV would bother to actually engage with random NPCs enough that that level of depth of AI is necessary, and it sure as shit would cost more than 0.1% of the game's budget to do so in a meaningful way.

It is technically possible. Off the top of my head I can think of at least two or three broad-level approaches to creating such a system which would allow you to pick a random NPC, get their phone number in-game, and then integrate them into the cast like an actually fleshed-out character that was meant to be there in the first place. It would be simple to implement, but very costly in terms of development time and resources.

However the fact that it's possible doesn't make the development of such AI practical or feasible for a video game's purpose.
Well I'd be interested to see what you dig up. I studied Comp Sci at uni so have a fairly good idea of how development goes - but ~~know~~ not much knowledge specifically around game dev.
[deleted]
Well well that's pretty interesting. Kind of a shame that the AI devs get the shaft like that but I guess also not that surprising. People are like crows. We like shiny things. 

Also had no idea about a dedicated "AI Chip" even being a possibility, but it's certainly a cool one.
I don’t play games where the point remotely lays in having full conversations where I as the player have to initiate fully formed questions and statements, and if I did (VN, point and click, etc), I would prefer a bespoke and curated experience, story and dialogue. But hey- that’s me. I can’t speak for others. I just see it as a “bells and whistles” sort of application to most current forms of gaming, and can’t see it as anything but a distraction in any kind of game where the point isn’t to test the conversational capabilities of a non-human conversationalist. 

I have to admit- it would be kinda funny to ask Zoltan in Witcher 3 for example how to make a soufflé just to see what he comes up with in his voice and affectation, but again- I’d show it to 3 friends who would only find it impressive if they hadn’t seen it before I showed it to them, we’d all agree that it was cool and advanced, and then I’d go back to wanting Zoltan to help me figure out who Dandelion was boning so we could track his whereabouts.
A game just released during the 2023 gamejam called "Detective GPT" which integrates the AI pretty well. It's crude, but a good first step.
[AI powered NPC dialog is already being worked on](https://youtu.be/jH-6-ZIgmKY), but believable NPC dialog is still probably a few years away. This kind of tech is super promising and can really add so much to role playing in games.
What I'd like to know is why all these discussion threads get donvoted to oblivion. I wanna hear the discussions about it.
Its got some hurdles to overcome. It took a week, maybe 2, for that Twitch show "Nothing Forever"  to get banned because it started to make transphobic jokes. No developer or publisher is gonna want to put something into a game where they can't control what is going to be said.

I would imagine as soon as a major game implements this the various Ratings Boards across the world will probably crack down on it. So the only games that would get something like this are games that are already aiming for a mature audience.
I don't think many people wanna manually input dialogue to talk to NPCs. It seems tedious to do so. Could work well for a Visual Novel or text adventure tho. Wouldn't be a lotta fun to have to contribute a lotta effort into talking to random NPCs in a RPG. I would like to see more life brought towards them tho. It helps make the world feel alive when they react to occurrences that happen in the game. I like talking to NPCs in Dragon Quest because of that.
I got a lot of joy out of npc to npc conversations in Oblivion, I imagine AI is probably already pretty good at simulating something similar. The question is, if the novelty would wear off if multiple games are doing it/we're more aware of the background process.
Todd Howard has been talking a bit about it in his Interview with Lex Friedman. 
Pretty interesting stuff. 
This will most certainly be a reality in a few years imo.
I really don't want this in games. 

In almost every regard, I would always prefer human written dialogue and story telling. AI just can't match human emotion and storytelling. If that results in less dialogue, then that's a sacrifice I'm willing to make for quality.
I think implementing such an ai would only work in online games, as the best on device AI we have is still Siri
What would an AI be able to accomplish in the field of NPC chatter that wouldn't be better suited to a human?. In my experience an NPC has to say very specific things or else what is even the point of it existing? 

For example, say it's an inconsequential NPC in a town of an RPG. What information would you possible have to gain from them that isn't already solved by manual text? Is there a risk that an AI wouldn't understand what the player should or shouldn't know already and inadvertently give away plot points? Or would it perhaps just drone on and on about pointless information that doesn't even line up with another NPCs text, or maybe even conflict with the overarching plot or world building?

AI isn't really Intelligent, it's more akin to very complex algorithms than another human mind. And if it does cross that threshold, isn't it very inhumane to expect that we can make them slaves to our whims of creativity?
in order for this to be not just a gimmick it needs to be just one aspect of the super NPC AI. Each NPC would need to be able to do three things 

1.  have goals, likes, dislikes and the ability to change these things overtime.
2.  be able to acknowledge the changes in their world and voice an opinion on them.
3. have ability and initiative to affect the world outside of the player's influence.

throw in something that makes each NPC even more unique, like say letting each one develop an entirely original type of magic based on who they are and their past experiences and you've got a truly living breathing world who's population and landscape will shift and warp as power hungry mages ascend to lichdom only to be felled by heroes who rose to the call when their villages were destroyed and all of it without the player doing anything.
I'm wondering if next gen consoles would have an integrated AI chip and use it to enhance reactivity and how NPCs and the like could react to the player. It doesn't have to be used for any real or central purpose, but general world building and reactivity.
Well as a game developer I am certainly thinking of how to work towards more interesting NPC AI with a transformer! Just in my hobby time. I might then actually encounter NPC interactions in my own game that surprise me and make the world that I create even more alive.

And I'm not at all worried about the AI doing anything like taking over, or being scary or something. It's still my storytelling, but then smartly mixed. Very much like an interpolation machine, between multiple text options that I taught it. I like it!
unreal engine integration with live AI chat: [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h4Vr-n0XNdg](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h4Vr-n0XNdg)

Not 10 years away.
[deleted]
Well said!
[deleted]
And it will be probably as shitty and generic as their ai generated quests.
[deleted]
There is probably room for both. In some games it could be interesting, in others full designed and scripted events work better.     


Imagine a procedural games like No Mans Sky... but with tons of full interactive NPCs that can assigned story driven quests.
I could see this being really fantastic for a game like No Mans Sky, where everything is already procedurally generated outside of a few things.
Fully procedural entertainment is an inevitability I also don’t want to race toward.
Writing will never go away, but i can see it being implemented to fill in gaps rather than replace the main writers.

If you want to fill a world with NPC's there's only so much a writing team can do before you have to have NPC's either constantly repeating themselves, or you have to limit the amount of NPC's in your game. With chat AI you could expand this significantly.

Look at it this way: Developers already make use of procedural tech when creating large landmasses, however they still determine its general design and they still fill in critical details in main locations. I think chat AI could be used the same way. The writers can focus on writing the main story and main characters, give a decent amount of side characters some dialogue, and let the less important NPC's be handled by a chat AI.

One example would be a game like Cyberpunk 2077: You have the main and side quests fully handled by the main writing team, but there's tons and tons of NPC's which are basically identical and only say 2-3 lines. Let a chat AI handle those to give it more variety and depth (assuming halfway decent voice synthesis would also be available). In that game it'd even be kind of thematic too :P

Chat AI will never replace human writers, but in this way i think it'd add a bit of life to certain kinds of games (mostly large open world rpg's) . That said, it'll be 5 to 10 years *at least* until this becomes viable, maybe longer. What we have now is still incredibly crude.
>I really don't want this in games. 
>
>In almost every regard, I would always prefer human written dialogue and story telling. AI just can't match human emotion and storytelling. If that results in less dialogue, then that's a sacrifice I'm willing to make for quality.

You don't see it ever improving? This is great. Especially in open world RPGs where the voice acting always sucks, and is expensive to do well with massive amounts of audio bulking up the game size.
This honestly just a pretty naïve take.
Artificial Intelligence will get better and will at some point be functionally indistinguishable from human writing. 
You "wanting" human written dialogue is purely based on emotional biases.
That's generally a device problem though. Since most handheld devices don't have the processing power to run a good AI.

OPs idea in theory is actually doable right now. The problem would be implementing it into a game, without the user needing a top of the line PC and having 5minute loading times per response.
The advancement is say you have a game like Cyberpunk or GTA where NPCs are just fodder that occasionally say weird phrases.  

Theoretically if they AI was good enough you could automate full in the moment conversations with these NPCs. Hell you might even be able to automate full mini quests.  

I think for some types of games this would work well (games that try to build fully immersive worlds), for others it would be unnecessary.
Spoken like someone who literally has no idea about how any of that works lol
You had me till that last sentence.  I fully believe that we will get to a point where AI is creating games (barring legislation preventing that) but the full extent of what you're suggesting is more than 10 years away.  There's definitely a market for it though, if a company like EA could lay off its studio's workforces and just have executives/writers along with an IT department to maintain their AI farms I can definitely see it happening.  

I guess the real proof of concept would be to see if Chat GPT can write a program to generate something like a text based adventure game.  I've never been able to get through the queue to actually generate something and I don't have the time right now.
By my reckoning, large language models are too unreliable for important work, too quickly outdated for internet search, too expensive to generate for personal projects... but they may actually make sense for use as toys and games. It's unfortunate that their position as the last, desperate hope for investors trying to catch the "next big thing" might make them poisonous to the one market they might be useful to.
But this is actually good.
At firat sure.
But I think in a few decades this will have developed to a point where we can't imagine it any other way.
Classic Todd, just looking out for the people. He always knows what we really want.
Writing is one of those things I DON'T want generated. 

I don't truly believe AI chats in video games would maintain any believable conversation. I tried to talk to one of those AI bots that pretend to be characters. I thought I was gonna talk to Master Chief, instead within 5 minutes the bot had broken down so bad it literally morphed into believing it was a 16 year old autistic girl from the UK who didn't know what Halo was. I made Paul Atreides believe his dad was alive and was a huge fan of 22 Jump Street. Sure, it's endless conversations, but it's mostly nonsense and it wouldn't work in a game with established lore and settings and stories when you can just talk an AI into believing something. 

I sincerely don't believe that tech can do anything better then a human writer. Human writers can put emotion into their dialogue and stories, meaning and purpose. AI can't do that. Procedurally generating a level makes sense in some games, especially NMS where it's all about exploring an endless universe. But every single time, I will always prefer a human writer who can write something interesting and compelling, rather then an AI that MIGHT be able to string together a few sentences but inevitably break down and fall back on generic responses.
That’s what I’m saying though. I could be wrong but afaik chat GPT only runs off online servers right now, and it’s still too slow to use in a game. We still need another few generations of CPU upgrades for it to make sense to implement in offline games on consoles/PC, and we at least improvements in networking infrastructure to make it viable via online processing. Sure it’s “doable” now but not in any capacity that really matters.
Exactly this. It would be very beneficial for open world games to make it seem believable. Not just in a conversation sense but the npc ai as well. Instead of just having an npc stand around grumbling the same couple phrases as you walk by, they could pull out conversations based on things they saw, heard, know about the player etc. Some npc already do this to an extent in some games, where they will make a comment about something the player has done previously. The difference is the devs wouldn't have to manually program these interactions for each npc they want them to occur with. It could go way more in depth than that.

>I guess the real proof of concept would be to see if Chat GPT can write a program to generate something like a text based adventure game.  I've never been able to get through the queue to actually generate something and I don't have the time right now.

I'm not even sure that at some point in the future the AI needs to write a program for making a game. Rather the program would be implicit in it's training weights.

It's like right now we are using a lot of fancy algorithms in a game engine to create lifelike visuals. We're calculating how the polygons are moving, how they are oriented with respect to the camera and light sources, where they would be projected onto the screen etc. pp.
On the other hand, image generation AIs don't do any of that, instead they just immediately draw the pixels in a way that they have learned what photos and drawings look like.


So maybe at some point in the future you don't need an AI that writes game logic but rather an AI that has learned how to draw images and update the next one in the sequence based on player input etc.

This is obviously not 2 years away but I'm curious if our outlook on how to use AI changes as the tech gets more widespread and we get used to it (think about how the first cars basically looked like horse carriages because that's what people had in their mind for transportation and it's what workshops were already comfortable building).
a decade at most, probably closer to 7 years
Dude, all of the conversations  but the main quest dialogue in nms is procedural, I genuinely think an AI would do a better job of it than the system that's there.  Also, you really underestimate how good AI is going to get in the coming years.  By the end of this decade we won't be able to tell the difference, and at that point what does it matter?
https://youtu.be/jH-6-ZIgmKY

Watch this. This was literally one year ago.
It doesn't matter. If you gonna make game, you gonna make it.

This is why indie games with retro graphics or even text adventure game still existed. They don't care to move to 3D photorealistic at all. 

Same as AI. They don't have to use it to make a game. They just make game their way. It also apply to engine choice as well. Even today, someone still make their own engine in order to make game.
I'll add a counter argument. There has never been a better time to be in games. There's things generative AI brings to the table that solve long standing gaps in gaming. The next 10 years are going to see an explosion of creativity and exploration of games, gaming technologies that's unprecedented.

Think of how hollow and brittle current games are with NPCs, with simulation of world events. Games also have a content problem, where we cant scale good content to match the desires of gamers. There's an endless list of ways in which AI can aid us. Current focus on GPT as a chatbot is not looking deep enough.

Now, selling games is an entirely different matter. But as someone who is excited about seeing the art of games advance, this is going to be fire.

Also, consider checking out my subreddit /r/aigamedev
The recent advances in AI that you're talking about don't really exist, outside of niche applications. There are some notable exceptions, but otherwise the field has been stagnant for decades.

What people think is advancement is merely using bigger and bigger datasets. ChatGPT is a prime example of this. They used enormous amounts of training data to get it to be even somewhat useful.

Here's the thing about training data. Very few have access to it, and it's ultra expensive to acquire and work with it, unless you steal it of course. It's mostly useless to small budget companies for basing complex products on.

The age of AI is not here yet. Until we have AI models that can be trained using the data generated by a very small number of people (say below 100), I wouldn't discount the importance of traditional development just yet.
AI was a popular topic at GDC this year. Several platforms are integrating ChatGPT or similar services, which can already generate code. There are others looking at 2D to 3D generation, procedural generation, and other automation. Large studios like Epic are making investments in this area, so I expect fairly rapid adoption over the next few years. Check out the State of Unreal.
The 1980s.

Probably the late 1980s and early 1990s.  

Yes, AI is improving substantially.  But it's been around for 50 years.  Perhaps you want to rephrase your question to "games using the next generation of AI?"
Probably never, the current nueral net/machine learning has massive problems both in being part of the production flow and lots of legal problems including copyright.
Never? AI as it stands now (machine learning models/neural nets) generating content and stuff is already a legislative hell and the prospect of using it in commercial products is unlikely at a large scale.

Right now it’s in “boom” aka some major advancements that interest the general public which is why it’s making the waves right now. But it will settle out and the general public will lose interest and it will just because an aspect of everything. It will continue to improve and get better but it will never replace creators. Sure you will see assholes like Ubisoft try and eek out junior positions with their script writer AI tools and stuff but look at all the backlash that got already. Companies will always try to save money but at the end of the day creators don’t have to let it control the industry.

You don’t personally have to use any AI tools or whatever and you don’t have to let it discourage you either. Do what you need to and take the time you need to consider your options but you should never stop creating what you want to create just because of things like this. It was just the other day that everyone wanted to make NFT & Blockchain game and we see how well that went.
If you’re worried about AI in general, there’s no industry you can hide in. Even physical trades will be affected by rapidly advancing robotics.

The best way to protect yourself from AI is to master wielding it.

That doesn’t mean losing your creativity or your own bespoke craftsmanship. AI is just a tool.

Don’t be like a hand-painter lamenting the invention of Photoshop and the death or their artistry.

The world will always change and you have to adapt to remain a part of its culture and industry.
Meh. I remember when “high level” languages that compiled to machine code were considered to be the death knell of “real” programmers. Or when people complained that nobody was learning “vanilla” JS anymore.

AI is just another abstraction that further removes the dev from the machine. You can choose to use it or not.
AI won't replace solo game developers' jobs for several reasons, even though AI has made significant advancements in recent years. Here are some key reasons why solo game developers will continue to be relevant:
  

  
Creativity and Originality: AI can generate content based on patterns and data it has been trained on, but it still lacks the ability to create truly original and innovative concepts. Solo game developers can come up with unique ideas, characters, and storylines that AI might struggle to create.
  

  
Emotional Intelligence: Human game developers have a deep understanding of human emotions and can create experiences that evoke emotional responses from players. AI, on the other hand, lacks the emotional intelligence to create nuanced experiences that resonate with players on a deeper level.
  

  
Complex Decision-Making: Game development often involves making complex decisions based on multiple factors, such as design, budget, and player feedback. AI might be able to assist with some aspects of decision-making, but it is not yet capable of understanding and balancing all the factors that go into game development.
  

  
Artistic Vision: Solo game developers often have a strong artistic vision for their games, which helps them create unique experiences. AI-generated content, while impressive, can sometimes lack the personal touch and distinctiveness that comes from an individual's artistic vision.
  

  
Collaboration and Communication: Game development often requires collaboration and communication with others, such as artists, musicians, and writers. Solo game developers are skilled at working with others to bring their ideas to life, while AI still struggles with understanding and responding to human communication in a meaningful way.
  

  
Adaptability: Game developers need to adapt to new technologies, trends, and player expectations. While AI can be trained to adapt to some extent, human developers can more easily adjust their approach based on the ever-changing landscape of the gaming industry.
  

  
In summary, AI has the potential to assist solo game developers in various aspects of game development, but it is unlikely to replace their jobs entirely. Human game developers possess unique skills, creativity, and emotional intelligence that are difficult to replicate with AI, allowing them to create experiences that resonate with players on a deeper level.

&#x200B;

Chatgpt's answer
Ai will at best be able to make super simple games in our lifetime. There's a huge difference between generating a script and a whole game.
People still spend their time and money on candy crush.

AI isn't going to steal anybody's candies.

Just because you can build StarCraft 3 in 5 minutes of prompting doesn't mean you're going to have a good game. And no, AI won't be building StarCraft 3.
To your question of *How long?*, unfortunately the answer for indie devs/small studios is ***last month***.

Before the end of this year, we will have fully AI generated scripts, short-form movies, and soundtracks, with AI actors and voices. In fact, we should have this by summer.

*Every* knowledge-based industry will change over the next few months. Especially gaming, with a projected **$396 billion** in gaming revenue for 2023.

If you aren't starting to incorporate AI into your tool set, you will be left far, far behind.

- 2d / 3d texture map graphical assets can be currently generated. 
- AI generate pixel art is already in play.
- AI generated audio [music, speech] exists.
- AI generated content that caters to individual players.
- So much more...

The next/current level of chat bots that will take absolutely takeover **all** social media with *un-fucking-precedented* coherency and mind blowing conversational skills. This means you can stuff all your social media with bots that are all but indistinguishable from humans -right now. [if it's not clear, that translates to a marketing team that costs pennies to operate 24/7].

All the pieces exist and are falling very neatly in place as we type.

*Should you go into carpentry?* If you don't already make a good living making games *AND* you are choosing to ignore AI in your tool set, then **yes**, go into carpentry. 

Or focus on B2B application development.
 
You will not catch up without AI.
Is this post generated as a generic reply to some other post?

Doesn't address anything I said at all.
Is there really need for such pedantics? With current events, I think it is fairly clear what I am referring to.
>lots of legal problems including copyright.

the only people that think this are people that don't actually understand copyright law

the only major open question is can the works produced by AI be copyrighted, and the answer seems to be "only if a human also had significant involvement", so that's a pretty big gray area.  This is a question that will be answered in the next few years.
>legal problems including copyright

The only problems are about dataset distribution, LAION-5B might be invalid if deemed not sufficiently transformative, unlike google books.

Also, this is a to the absolute-T a technological war issue. No sane court is going to rule against training material consumption and would only ever rule about distribution. Ruling against the use of copy-written training material means giving unilateral victory to other parties (China will just do its' thing and own everyone by giving zero shits).

AI is a war and infrastructure power issue at the lowest.
"probably never"

funniest shit I've ever read

here you go

[https://www.reddit.com/r/blender/comments/121lhfq/](https://www.reddit.com/r/blender/comments/121lhfq/)

&#x200B;

don't hide your head in the sand
The legal “problems” are massively over blown. The legal issues will settle out the way they always settle out…in favour of those who lobby best. Which means that if big content producers want generative assets copyrightable…they will end up copyrightable.
I don't understand why people say "never"

give me a reason why this is not a counterpoint to your argument then

[https://www.reddit.com/r/blender/comments/121lhfq/](https://www.reddit.com/r/blender/comments/121lhfq/)
AI has the potential to replace many jobs, including those of solo game developers, for several reasons:
  

  
Improved efficiency: AI can perform tasks faster and more accurately than humans, which means that the development of games can be streamlined. As AI technology advances, it can automate many aspects of game development, such as coding, designing, and testing, freeing up time for developers to focus on other aspects of the project or even making their jobs obsolete.
  

  
Cost-effectiveness: Employing AI can be more cost-effective than hiring human developers, as AI doesn't require benefits, vacations, or a salary. This economic advantage may lead game development companies to invest in AI technology to reduce costs, which could lead to a reduced demand for solo game developers.
  

  
Advanced tools: AI-driven tools are becoming more sophisticated and capable of generating complex assets, such as 3D models, textures, animations, and even procedural level design. These tools can greatly reduce the workload of a solo game developer and, in some cases, replace the need for their expertise altogether.
  

  
Procedural content generation: AI can generate game content procedurally, creating endless variations of levels, characters, and narratives. This technology can potentially replace solo game developers as it can create game worlds and stories that would take a human developer significantly more time to create.
  

  
Personalized gaming experiences: AI can analyze player behavior and preferences, tailoring game experiences to individual players. This level of personalization can be hard for solo game developers to achieve, as it requires a deep understanding of user data and the ability to adapt the game in real-time based on this information.
  

  
However, it is essential to note that while AI can replace certain tasks and aspects of a solo game developer's job, it may not be able to fully replace human creativity, intuition, and the unique perspective that a solo game developer brings to their work. As AI technology advances, it is more likely that it will complement and augment the work of game developers rather than fully replace them.

&#x200B;

further chatgpt's answer
last month games that are using AI got released substantially?

can you name some so I can take a look?
Their point is, if you want to keep doing things the way you're choosing to do them, then as a solo dev you have that prerogative.  If you don't want to be an AI prompter -> editor or whatever, then just *don't use those tools*.  But also, don't be afraid of new tools.

That said, you're thinking way too far ahead.  AI creating any meaningful game requires having enough understanding of interconnecting complex mechanics and knowing what makes something fun.  This level of AI is decades away if it's even possible at all.
ID3 and K-NNs have been used for ages.

They're still learning models that benefit from adversarial training.

Killer Instinct literally has you train a K-NN dataset with the whole shadow system.

There's more than just deep useless learning out there.
Idk why others downvoted you here. I hate people who talk like that. Pedantic nonsense.
No AAA is going to risk having their assets unprotected by copyright. It is a huge grey area and publishers do not roll dice with their IP.
Nice anecdotal evidence you got there
I saw you already posted this and would probably say something.

To me this is just part of the “boom” period of all this just like NFT/Blockchain stuff the last few years. They basically say their boss doesn’t care about the product and just wants to make money and save time. Yeah that’s gonna happen and it’s to be expected, but I wouldn’t expect it on a large scale. You will see it happen sure, but it’s not gonna consume everything and take over in my opinion.

I’m sorry if it gets you down and I hope you can still find passion and joy in creating and making things.
My personal human opinion, it is a great tool, for solo developers like us, it helps me a lot and will save me money.

Unless you are a concept artist or a translator, your job are alright in the next couple of years
Right now no one [or no studio] is going to admit to using AI assets/assistance since the both the massive negative public opinion and the murky legality are huge issues. During the 'last month', a bunch of AI projects really took off. Stable Diffusion and ChatGPT being some of the most talked about.

Here's a glimpse of what is *publicly* available on right now:

- mubert
- stable diffusion
- nvidia nerf
- llama llm
- copilot

You'll see very quickly how much AI is affecting all facets of game dev.
3-4 years away.
I disagree

luddites should just get out
I do think it's very likely that it's going to come down on the side of the things AI makes will be copyrighted.
exactly

indie games will be flooded with AI generated stuff

either way steam was already flooded with asset flips

indies never stood a chance
gamedevs mindbroken are really an amazing sight
So ridiculous

So many people who cannot answer a question
My previous statement is more about 3D games than *any* game.  Given that the idea of "video game" is an extremely broad concept with an even wider breadth of quality and content, can you say which game or genre that exists today you think AI might be able to replicate in 3-4 years time?

Personally, I actually wouldn't be surprised if AI is capable of reaching a rudimentary 2D Metroidvania style game by then.  Of course, how fun that game is (game design) and how well it flows (level design) I think would still be significantly lacking in that time.

But meaningful 3D games with complex, overlapping mechanics?  Not gonna happen any time soon
Based
though, who knows for sure I guess https://www.reuters.com/legal/ai-created-images-lose-us-copyrights-test-new-technology-2023-02-22/
Good luck out there, brother!
AI is 3-4 years away from being capable of making any game, of any genre, with enough rigorous detailed input. You will not be able to tell it to "make a game just like Skyrim" in 3-4 years but I'm confident that you will be able to sit down with it and extract 99% of what is necessary to make a game like Skyrim in that time.
Welp, only time will tell
Might be rather scientific, but [these guys](https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.05521) just published a paper on a deep learning based AI for Doom
Something like that is currently in development: http://www.helloneighborgame.com/

I have no clue how they do this and I'm not affiliated in any way with the developers.
From what I've read, AI is usually discouraged in games. The players like to kill dumb and predictable enemies. Therefore the swarm of zombie-themed games. But I'd love to see a game where AI is something to distinguish it from the crowd (aside from GO and Chess AI). 
This might be an [interesting read](http://www.kbs.twi.tudelft.nl/docs/MSc/2001/Waveren_Jean-Paul_van/thesis.pdf) for you.
This vid goes into the history of bots, and shows the ingenious ways the old Quake and Unreal devs programmed their AI.

Basically, AI had to act as much like an actual human as possible, because most people didn't have fast internet connection.

https://youtu.be/uoYjayrKRDs
NN is a solution to a fuzzy problem where information is incomplete but training examples are more abundant.  For example, you could use NN to improve the aim of a particularly bad shooter to make a FPS more fun for a weaker player. You could use a NN to manage a sidekick that tries to fill in for your weaknesses, or one that gets weaker as you get stronger, or finds ammo for you based on your typical firing rate.   As others said, it's not great for opponents except in strategy games as they can get better than you fast, but it might be a great solution to reduce frustration if levels are crazy difficult.  For most game scenarios, AIs are typically more procedural and there's no reason to put a NN on it because a variable with a percentage is usually good enough. Creatures (old game) had some rudimentary AI learning capability. if I recall.
 
If I'm understanding the second half of your post correctly, I think you should read [this](https://www.google.com/url?q=http://users.cecs.anu.edu.au/~rsl/rsl_papers/99ai.kambara.pdf&sa=U&ved=0ahUKEwiDtJ3i-sbPAhULz2MKHaHPCZUQFggQMAA&sig2=PiFkUjcYje-cxTHpyX9ptw&usg=AFQjCNGx2zaMyP_SU1__BrwHVIX6NAO6Yg) to get a better understanding of AI in general before applying it to games. Good luck!
virtua fighter on saturn had a learning a.i.  


the intent was that the a.i.'s improvements would be used gradually more frequently as the difficulty setting progressed from the first fight to the final boss.

except it was too good at learning player habits to the point it would anticipate everything you could do  

it eventually was changed so you can 'reset' the a.i.'s learned behaviours.
http://left4dead.wikia.com/wiki/The_Director
Once I tried to implement neural network for mobs in Minecraft, but it was damn difficult for me to understand how NN works. With the experience I get in programming and especially game programming lately I consider to implement such mechanism in my current game. It would be amazing to see what mobs would do based on history of action in open-world game. I wish someone would do this :)
I think this is what you're looking for https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i51x6-8GqkA
I remember seeing this on kickstarter quite a while ago and was very sad when it didn't get funded. Looks like a fun concept although I doubt it will be a truly self learning AI. It will probably just be programmed to react in certain ways depending on what the player does and thats it it wont really learn on how the player is playing. Although thats just my own theory and I may be 100% wrong so take what im saying with a grain of salt.
> AI is usually discouraged in games

Exactly this.

Most players like to be superior, only a handful like a challenge. And when they take on a challenge, they like to find ways how to game it.

If this is true, that is awful. I long for the old school days of quake and unreal with actually challenging bots.
I'm studying applied computer science, so I've already been working with neural networks for years. I'm pretty sure you'd need the computational power of Google to even try and run the AI of a game like Minecraft with neural networks.  
There are so, so, so many inputs and unforeseeable stuff that pretty much presents a lot of edge cases that, in my opinion, it's just not worth it.  
  
That being said I think if the entire game is built on the very idea to have self-learning AI it might just work. That's why I'm trying to gather what has been done before.
I only remember playing these games multiplayer, how were the bots in terms of AI?

I think people are okay with difficulty and challenge, but not with AI that adapts/evolves to the players actions, humans are not equipped for that and certainly would not find enjoyment from it. The enjoyable part about challenge is overcoming, AI that is constantly adapting to the player takes away that part.
"Humans are not equipped for that and certainly would not find enjoyment from it."

Neither of those are true, but matter of opinion depending on the player. 

I for one love it. I played the new Unreal recently and it was awesome that I couldn't tell who was AI and who was human for a long while.

The real reason we rarely see adaptive AI anymore is because of costs. Now we can simply play online with other actual humans for a challenge, so there's no need to develop such a complex system.
To answer your first question, the rudimentary system was that the AI basically recorded your movements, and recombined them into new patterns. You jump a lot? So does the AI. You duck around corners to lure them into the open? So does the AI. You pull off a crazy meta map trick? The AI now can do the same. 
Hmm, yes looking back on my argument it was arrogant to assume people wouldn't enjoy it. It certainly is up to the individual player.

But at the same time I think if the market for it was adequately large, it would have been done. There are plenty of single player genres that could benefit from adaptive AI for a more immersive experience. Horror, Action/Adventure/RPG/Idon'tknowwhattocallthisbeastanymore, etc.


F.E.A.R, while its quite old, the enemy AI still holds up as they employ smart flank and rush tactics to flush you out of cover.
I am thinking rain world just because ai ecosystem is out of this world, also am thinking starsector coz fvck them ai ships
Alien: Isolation

The whole game is a survival horror masterpiece. That fucking Xenomorph has such an AI that has been praised for years and other devs have tried to replicate it without success.

Here’s a video example, bit of spoilers ahead just in case:

[Revisiting the AI of Alien: Isolation](https://youtu.be/P7d5lF6U0eQ)
F.E.A.R.

https://www.rockpapershotgun.com/why-fears-ai-is-still-the-best-in-first-person-shooters
The Last of Us Part II  
Alien: Isolation  
Dishonored 2
Metal gear solid 5
The enemies in Metal Gear Solid V
Last of Us 2 probably has the best I’ve ever seen. Enemies hunt you down like real people. 

Alien Isolation, as well. The xenomorph has jump scared me so many times
Alien isolation has probably the smartes AI. The alien chnages tactics. It catches on to your tricks. For example a noise maker device used for distracting the alien to a distant location works in the early game. But as the game goes on it ignores the noise maker and if you keep using it the aluen starts to run in the opposite direction on the noise maker which is where the player would be. Clever girl.
Rain World. People dedicate hours in it just to observe the AI. 😊
Some games with great enemy AI:

* MetalGearSolid V
* Generation Zero
* Sniper Elite 5
* Ghost Recon Wildlands

In all three the enemy AI communicate, will spread out, flank, use cover, use sound in addition to LOS to locate you, snipe from great distance, use mortars, grenades, rockets, and melee weapons, run away when attacked if they don't have a fix on you location, and have somewhat randomized patrol routes and spawn locations.

All four are single player with the option for co-oop play.
I’ve heard Alien Isolation has good AI if you like horror
S.T.A.L.K.E.R. Enemies will suppress your last known position, fall back and try to flank you. The mutants hunt in unique ways and they can been seen hunting eachother and other stalkers. AI stalkers live out their own lives in the zone outside of your influence. Great AI
I didn't play the **Halo series**, but my friend did and he won't stop talking about that exactly: how the single-player enemies would be smart to react appropriately to what you do.
Mount and Blade. The ai isn’t super smart, but it will keep troops in formation, flank with cavalry, hold strategic positions, and utilise siege weaponry. As for having teammates, it’s your army versus theirs, you’re commanding your own troops and fighting alongside them, and once you have companions you can make them command your troops instead.
S.T.A.L.K.E.R is what you need, the AI is pretty good at flanking around and taking you out especially at max difficulty where both of you are able to take each other out with one or two bullets.
Good ole chess
When I hear smart ai the first 2 games I think of are Alien Isolation & Black & White: 2. Black and white is an RTS game though and I don't think you can even obtain a legal copy of it anymore or run it on anything modern.   


Some sandbox games have some pretty impressive AI but less so for their combat ai. Like Red Dead: 2, Grand theft auto: 5 and Modded Skyrim. (Hell even vanilla skyrim has the npc's living their own lives which is pretty cool)
HOLY SHIT OP I NEED YOU TO SEE THIS. It’s perfect for you lol 

Play *Will you Snail?*

The AI is genius, and tries to predict your movements. It also mocks you when you fail. All around fantastic experience. And the AI is super smart.
Rainworld. Any other answer is wrong.
Ground Branch has some of the most realistic AI known to video game history, it’s a co-op shooter where the objective is to take out terrorist in a wide verity of maps. The AI is super smart and (depending on the difficulty) will act like real people. Every step you make they can hear even from long distances which is very realistic. I find this one of the best realistic shooter games just because of the AI. By the way if you intend on getting this game check the hardware requirements first and update your graphics driver before playing.
The enemy AI in The Forest is great.
God Eater 3 

Code Vein
You'll have to go back to the 2000s,the last games had any kind of challenge
ShatterLine. In Coop mode has enemy soliders that move exactly as you describe. Free on Steam.
Try Gears Of War 4 & 5 really good AI. Made me think the longer i played it, the enemies were learning my patterns.
FEAR

The Division 2

Unreal tournament 2k4
every good shooter should have the things you listed, i suggest destiny 2 or division 2.

they are solely about fighting mixed groups of these enemy types.
Some really smart people created a real AI bot with machine learning for rocket league. It's called nexto it's not exactly what you're looking for but interesting for people into game ai
You said you're burned out on strategy games, but unfortunately, that's what I have.

AI War: Fleet Command is an RTS inspired by Supreme Commander that can only be played multiplayer in co-op, because the AI is good. Very good. As in "if you beat the AI at maximum difficulty, the developers consider it a bug" good. There's a sequel that is a little different, but still good from what I hear. I haven't played too much of it.
Metal Gear Solid 2.
SWAT 4. You play the leader of a SWAT force. Your enemies will hide behind doors, rush you if you're exposed, etc. You have to be very methodical if you want you and your team to survive and also follow police procedures. There's no saving, and enemy/civilian locations will change each time you play a mission.

It's a bit old, but still worth it. I suggest the fourth have specifically because it is the most immersive. Unlike its predecessors, this one was developed by the developers of Bioshock.
FEAR
Halo infinite
Metal gear solid 5. The enemies will put on helmets if you get too many headshots. They will use flashlights if you attack bases commonly during night. They will wear gas masks if you use smoke grenades a lot. They will also not run directly towards gun fire.
back4blood the bots are really good, its sort of horde shooter so the enemy AI isn't really smart
Not sure but maybe halo firefight
Far Cry 2 + Redux mod on redux difficulty.
Sons of the forest
Guild Wars. The first one. Enemy AI actually work in groups against you and even use formation. They even make judgment calls about remaining in your AOE if they think they might be able to kill you first or getting out of them. They also can use their skills in combination with each other.
Army of Two
Death Stranding but I’d call it more of a smart immersive environment as opposed to necessarily any real “enemies”…
Halo Infinites ai is really advanced while playing forge firefight they use flank strategies and end up overwhelming me and my friends
adding on to this, there's a free demo on steam of the upcoming game Trepang 2, which seems to try to capture the same magic (as far as combat goes, it's not a horror title afaik). 

I had good fun with the demo and I feel I can recommend it to anyone who liked FEAR.
Fear still holds up nowadays on AI aswell
I second this. The best strat against those clones is to keep moving and check your back often.
[redacted] is smarter than mee I swear.
I second Rainworld, especially scavengers.
Its interesting because the AI there isn't really that sophisticated.

It basically boils down to:

\- Decision tree of the type used in every other AAA game ever with the caveat that certain paths in the tree get activated if the player has managed to avoid getting killed by the Xenomorph in certain ways. (gives the illusion of learning but its really just a hardcoded 'only allow this to happen N times before going down a better path')

\- Make sure the alien is vaguely in the same general area as the player

There are no fancy neural networks or new technologies here, they just did a better job of writing their decision trees than other games.
The Last of Us Part II has tremendously good ai. Plus, different enemy groups and types will have hugely different playstyles. Some groups are really aggressive, others employ more tactics and slowly flank in. Even when not actively fighting, the ai is great at reacting to the environment, commenting on traps and dead allies.
Added bonus of the AI generally behaving more believably and *NOT* getting a permanent GPS fix on you once you enter combat. I love that you can actually reliably flee or cat-and-mouse if you can break line of sight, and they'll search for you where they last saw you instead of just homing in on your real time location.
I've never played a single player game that had the balls to let an NPC shoot you in the face from 20 yards away within a second of establishing line of sight. One of the most challenging experiences I ever had. I heard they cut enemies that could sneak up on you unfortunately because players never notices them until it was too late.
I'm been obsessed with this game for a year now. The AI is indeed fascinating
I second Sniper Elite 5. I've had times where I could reliably work with the AI to flank an enemy sniper in VS mode.
Sorry man, the AI in WL is garbage. Aimbots, hivemind, never reloading their weapons, going in straight line, guys with uzis that can snipe you with no recoil. Breakpoint made them way more realistic.
There are A couple of S.T.A.L.K.E.R. games on steam, which one has this? Or is it all of them?
I find a bit hit and miss but when when its's good it's really good.
Weird, even with the AI on high settings for me on ground branch they don’t behave smartly. Ready or not does AI better than ground branch
Great game but AI is not that kind of smart op is looking for
What's smart about Code Vein's AI?
Yes to Unreal Tournament 2k4!  That is one game I still keep on every computer I own.  Loads of content, always a fun time.  :)
The screenshots look very much like the game is in the same alley as fear, will check it out :)
Didn't they already do that in MGS1 ? I remember them doing that
Agreed! 😊
All of them, though I think its shown the best in the first two (Shadow of Chernobyl and Clear Sky) though Call of Pripyat has the best AI overall.
Checkout Stalker Anomaly too.  It's a free game built on a custom engine based on the Stalker engine.  Everyone will say to start with SOC, but definitely keep Anomaly on your radar as something to graduate to.

The Stalker series has its own subreddit, I recommend checking that out.  The original games work on modern system, but there is a baseline community patch for each that fixes tons of bugs and/or adds QOL features.  (like ZRP for SOC)

Stalker uses something called A-Life which is like an grand AI director that connects all AI from every region, so even when you're not around, the AI is still doing stuff.

When you combo this and how the AI fights with mods, they become some of the best AI around.  Like, literally sneaking around cover to attack and whatnot.  They'll do this stuff in the vanilla game, but stuff like Anomaly makes it feel like real encounters.

I also recommend the game F.E.A.R.  The AI in that uses something called GOAP, the "Goal Oriented Action Planning system".  You can watch stuff about it, but it makes the encounters with the AI combatants feel organic.
Yeah, I'll take an advanced AI which is occasionally very dumb over an ai that just sits in cover all day.
The team mate AI is decent in RoN also, if you wanna play solo
The companion AI is fantastic
I'm late to the MGS party and haven't played the other MGS games, but you're right that it's definitely not a new concept. That said, AFAIK it's still rare for games with stealth mechanics to implement them well enough that running and hiding feels viable after detection. A lot of action games just tack on stealth as an afterthought.
This is kind of in-depth analysis /r/games needs more of. 

This channel is great at breaking down AI into an understandable concept and showing us behind the curtain 
I honestly think Halo 3 was the peak of gaming.  Amazing campaign with great gameplay, cinematic+interactive storytelling, the beautiful music that I still listen to in my car from time to time, perfect couch co-op, unlimited amounts of fun for online matchmaking for both competitive and casual, custom games that benefited big time from the creativity generated within Forge mode, and then the theater mode where you could go back and review all your shit.  Hell I got into filmmaking more seriously because of making machinimas with my friends using Halo 3.  It never felt like a dry experience.  You could play Halo 3 in any way and still have a blast.

11 years later and Halo 5 removed couch co-op which essentially kills a lot of the essence that was Halo.  I think studios have forgotten what made gaming great and should really go back and revisit Halo 3 to find out why it lasted for so long on the shelves as everyones must have video game.

EDIT:
watch this if you need more reasons why https://youtu.be/8aFMpmTv3lA
Hey everyone, just wanted to pop in here and say thanks for watching the video (that's my soothing Scottish tones you hear in the video).  As stated in the video a couple years back I did a video on [Halo 2](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NU717sd8oUc) (which sadly hasn't aged terribly well), but this gave me a nice opportunity to return to the series (though I did manage to spell Max Dyckhoff's name wrong - sorry!).  I was pleasantly surprised by how well Halo 3 holds up having not played it again since I first bought the Master Chief Collection a few years back.

Whether I can return to Halo in the future I'm not sure - I only make videos when I can be 100% confident in how the AI works in a given game.  There's not a huge amount of information about Halo 4 or 5 I've been able to find.  Right now the only Halo game I know I can tackle is Halo Wars 2 (which is really quite interesting when you know how that game works).
Don't have time to watch at the moment but man there isn't any other video game music that immediately strikes me like that piano at the beginning of the video. What a fucking game
Halo 3 will always be the pinnacle of gaming for me, 

&#x200B;

there is one word for the Halo campaign, legendary.
Hey cool I made this. Pretty surreal seeing my 10 year old GDC slides being used. And he spelled my last name wrong. :( 
When I first heard about *Halo Wars* I was super hyped because I thought maybe they were going to make an rts/shooter in which the units you produced would fight each other in the same way the AIs in the Halo series fought each other, which would have been *amazing*. Too bad it ended up being a mediocre and pretty standard RTS.

I used to re-load some of the larger fights between human/covenant/flood forces in Halo just to watch them play out in different ways. There was one particular fight I remember from the first game where an infected human had a rocket launcher and the whole fight hinged on whether they could land a good rocket hit before dying. 
Conceptually, this is a very intuitive system, but it sounds like something that could easily go wrong or have major issues that leads to bad behavior like random covenant running across the map to an objective 5 zones behind the player or running in circles as they thrash between tasks or something like that.

It's impressive that the system largely blended into the background of the game and did pretty much exactly what it was meant to do.

Halo's always had interesting AI just at the squad level with relatively simple enemies, that lead to emergent but manageable behavior when they are encountered in groups of varying pieces. An evolution of game design as old as gaming, but done really well with an understanding of the right level of complexity to make the player feel good. This system just takes that up a level.
This video was sooooo cool.

I really wonder if there other non Bungie FPS games that use just as an advanced AI task system. I personally feel like we haven't had that same level of AI depth since Halo: Reach in an FPS game. Even single player focused FPS games like Far Cry or Bioshock feel like they lack the same level of AI advancements.
Halo 3 is still my favorite of the Halo pve sandboxes. All thanks to the combination of the AI tree, the fantastic environment designs, the equally fantastic AI placements in those areas, the weapons sandbox full of old favorites, the familiar yet fresh vehicle sandbox and last but definitely not least the deployable equipment that added some minor variety depending on the player. Also congratulations for all involved in the Brute redesign, that was an incredibly successful overhaul of a fairly meh Halo 2 enemy.
I honestly never really knew just how complicated AI got in shooters. 

I always figured it was functions as simple as:

`"If In combat" -> "take cover and kill player" -otherwise-> "Patrol Area until player arrives"`

with auxiliary functions like `"close to vehicle -> get in vehicle"`. 

Knowing that there's this much to it honestly makes me want to replay the game and pay more attention to what each enemy is doing. 

Excellent video. This guy definitely just got a new viewer, can't wait to check out his other stuff. 
It'd be nice to see more of this, but i'd be surprised if this post gets much traction. 

Years ago when I joined this sub in it's early days, coming from /r/gaming, there was a lot more interesting discussion and content. Now it feels a lot more drama/rumor centric. 
Mark browns game analysis is good too
Unfortunately more of is hard, since the channel almost exclusively posts only on ganes they can talk to devs about or have already talkes about.
If you like this sort of technical and creative insight into games, I'd suggest checking out NoClip's work. They're doing some incredible stuff.
Not only that, this video is the prime example of one thing in which Halo 3 (honestly the whole trilogy) did better than most modern games: AI. The AI in Halo feels incredible, and I never seen such a flexible AI in modern shooter that can seamlessly change from a role to another, swap weapons, ride vehicles, act differently depending on which seat of the vehicle they're in (they can even drive for you), and all of these while also engaging in mid-scale battle with multiple allies and enemies.

Not to mention, Halo 4 and 5 promoted all that competitive bullcrap, while they should've been promoting the most unique part of the franchise: custom games. There is no other shooter that allowed you to create custom maps and custom modes with the depth even Halo 3 allowed. Players dumped HUNDREDS of hours on stupid gamemodes like Fat Zombie and Jenga Tower... And it was amazing!

Halo 5 is a pile of wasted potential, that's why I'm hoping they'll learn their lesson with the next title. One of the best things they could do is custom game cross play. 
Absolutely. Halo 3 is probably my favorite game of all time. Like it's actually astounding how good it is. 
As someone that hasn’t played much halo beyond the first 2 and loves couch multiplayer, would you say it holds up nowadays? I’ve been looking for a 4 player splitscreen shooter and I’m not a big fan of cod
Not only that, but the DLC that was released free'd up the previously released DLC, so you were getting a lot of free content, and microtransactions hadn't ruined the base game.
God damn you’re so right. I just got the master chief collection and that game holds up without even trying...and no “hd makeover” either. You can spend hours just dicking about with the ai systems, the physics, etc. I love halo 3, it will always have a place in my library.
Counterpoint: the story falls apart as soon as you start to actually think about it (edit: [article](http://haruspis.tumblr.com/post/89804205288/why-halo-3s-story-was-horsecock)), the gameplay felt sluggish with a very low FOV, and the hit detection online was rubbish.
Yeah, Halo 3 was the best.  I remember playing all the way through 4 at a launch party and having a pretty good time but not a great one.  I sat down a couple days later and played some 3 and realized that there was a lot missing from 4.
> 11 years later and Halo 5 removed couch co-op which essentially kills a lot of the essence that was Halo

Most people dont play couch co-op, even back then, you'd see more lone wolfs rather than people having guests attached to their profile. 

Halo 5 is still a great game, shit campaign, but on par multiplayer, maybe slightly worse than 3. But they finally added a server browser to Custom game. I would have killed for that back in Halo 3. It was painful to be locked out because the only lobby your friends were in was full (16 players).
Halo 3 was okay but in some respects was not as good as 1 and 2. It failed to get big traction and was overtaken by Call of Duty 4 (which revolutionized multiplayer FPS game design). So peak of gaming? Nah.
Piano at the beginning of Ocarina of Time?
Y'know every video I somehow manage to make one tiny mistake somewhere that bugs me forever afterwards.  I thought I'd got away with it this time and then... nope.  Sorry about that!
no i made this :)
Keep in mind that the AI for an FPS's campaign mode is meant to be and should be very different than how it works for a balanced RTS.
Halo Wars was hampered I think by being designed for console. I don't want to be PCMR or anything since there's plenty of games I prefer on console, but I think that the controller gameplay forced the game to be more strategy oriented. If the game had a fine unit control / micro layer to the gameplay it'd probably a lot more fun and more authentic to Halo, because Halo has never really been about two blobs of dudes just shooting each other other watching each other die. They'd always have a lot of strafing back and forth, rolling out of the way of each other's grenades, taking cover, and so forth that you could express with a micro layer. 

That said, /u/Avengerr said it best, Halo Wars is for people who want to see more of the Halo universe, not necessarily those who want Big-Big Team Battle between UNSC and Covvies.  


I had the same hope for halo wars. I wish it was common for games with goos mechanics and AI to have a dev/sandbox mode to create spawn points and choose enemy and pick ai patterns for a skirmish.

At least people seemed to enjoy Halo wars.
I don't think you know what the word sandbox means
It's sort of devolved into gaming news. 
Imagine the upvotes if the title mentioned EA or lootboxes
I don’t see the drama, but I also don’t read to far into the comments.
[I miss posts like this](https://np.reddit.com/r/gaming/comments/uxpil)
Hey, thanks for watching the video (that's my voice - and my words too).  My social tracker was telling me this video had a lot of traffic coming from Reddit.  I think I found the source! :)

Indeed you're correct videos are driven from actually sourced material: either existing talks or posts (such as both my [Halo 2](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NU717sd8oUc) and Halo 3 videos) and/or from actually interviewing developers who are happy to talk to me (my recent videos on [Spec Ops: The Line](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y--BgBOPduE) and [DOOM (2016)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RcOdtwioEfI) are a good example of this).  Simply put if I don't know for certain how it works, the video doesn't get made, which is a shame as there are some topics/games I've had to abandon over the years as I just could not find the info I needed to bring it all together.

Case studies typically appear once a month - I work as an AI researcher and freelance game AI programmer so this is my evening/weekend job/pet project.  Whilst I often keep topics close to my chest (my patreon supporters usually get a month or two heads-up), I do have some very exciting games lined up for the next 3-6 months.  One of which is my first legitimate 'exclusive' as I was invted to a AAA studio to see their AI systems for a title that was released earlier this year.
That's the kind of in depth content I'm after though, I'm happy to wait between posts as I know work is being put in.
I'm just glad that despite 343 promoting all their esports stuff, Forge mode is still improving with each iteration. I'd even say that the best part of Halo 5 is the Forge (and that Halo 5's Forge is the best so far), so it's still nice to see that 343 isn't throwing that aspect of Halo away.
The custom game environment for Halo 5 is more powerful than ever though. There is even a custom games browser and plans to add one to MCC. It won't be shocking at all to see similar support for Infinite with cross play. 
I don't know much about game design, and the industry always scared me because of the way employees are treated.  BUT, the one thing that's always called me to want to make a game is the desire for a wonderful game that blended the map editors of Timesplitters, Far Cry, and Halo: Forge. Far Cry 5 got soooo close with the frankly fucking amazing map editor, but shit the bed with 2 game modes (deathmatch and team deathmatch) and a god awful lobby browser system.  Just mix that in with the Halo Forge browser system and it's custom game mode stuff.

I just want to be able to mold the environment and add in custom inside level design, and have enough game modes to have crazy dumb fun for years.  Man, what I wouldn't do to have the Predator mode from Far Cry:Instincts Predator.

If there was one game I could wish into existence it'd be that.
> There is no other shooter that allowed you to create custom maps and custom modes with the depth even Halo 3 allowed. 

Umm ... Have you *seen* the stuff people are making in *Halo 5*'s forge? Or are you just running on the hate-train for karma/nostalgia?

Because people are making little *missions*. Not just maps, levels and game types, but *missions* with objectives and asymmetrical online play.

Switches that open doors, spawn units, turn off lights across a building ... Players are making some amazing stuff and better yet, the devs actually incorporate it into the online playlists in rotations to show off the coolest new modes and maps.

For Halloween it's freaking versus L4D in Halo, for example.
Can't say for Halo 4, but Halo 5 was where the kept "competitive" in mind from the start of creation.

I put quotes around competitive because the competitive community didn't like what they did, the casual audience felt alienated, and the Halo community ended up with a game that did not really cater to any audience, despite 343's claims.
If you want to see good AI play Arma.
Plenty of other shooters had that level or more of customiseability (PC games of then and before were built around user creations and modding in mind), Halo just reached a shit ton more players
With the name "Halo: Infinite", I'm really hoping that somehow ties into not only the story, but also the Forge and Custom Games modes. Maybe it'll have optional crossplay and a huge emphasis on sharing modes and them continually adding new pieces and features to Forge, kinda like a Halo platform for years to come. 

A man can dream. 
[deleted]
I replayed 2, 3, ODST, Reach and 4 with a friend recently. They all hold up and 3 was definitely the best. 
I'd think so.  I played so much of it as a kid with my friends that it was always very enjoyable.  I know for Halo 3 you can play the campaign with 4 players plus there's a lot to do if you connect to xbox live tho I can't speak for the XboxOne version.  I honestly wouldn't mind being able to play it with my wife now but not interested in buying a bunch of hardware to warrant the nostalgia.
Halo 3 is hands down the best splitscreen shooter ever made. Halo Reach is also fantastic in that regard.
There only one that was made free it its lifetime was the heroic pack (the first one)
Eeeeeeeeh lets not give Bungie improper credit. I was in Highschool when Halo 3 came out and it was a game I remember having to save up my own money for to buy (because my parents refused to buy Videogames for me).

When the first DLC Map Pack came out, they took away literally THE ONLY playlist that I played. Big Team Battle (8 v 8 with vehicles) was locked behind the Map Pack, you couldn't play it without. It made me drop the game pretty quickly with a bad sour taste in my mouth.

Every time Bungie does something shady with microtransactions and or DLC Pricing in Destiny (Hint: They do it A LOT) I am still reminded of this. Having a game I paid 60 dollars for to play Big Team Battle, and then having that Big Team Battle taken away from me...
"A lot" defined here as "1 map, followed by the first of two map packs if you bought the second one."

Except you had to buy the first or get locked out of some playlists.

Then again the rage about "microtransactions ruining the base game" says that you're both just griping at little and probably didn't play much of any *Halo* online either.
"A lot" defined here as "1 map, followed by the first of two map packs if you bought the second one."

Except you had to buy the first or get locked out of some playlists.

Then again the rage about "microtransactions ruining the base game" says that you're both just griping at little and probably didn't play much of any *Halo* online either.
yup. sounds like this guy didnt play halo 2 when it came to hit detection. the BR spread in H3 was abysmal. but i did like the spawn system somewhat better though
A LOT of people here have nostalgia goggles on. And I say that as someone who still plays MCC every few weeks
>It failed to get big traction

lmao it averaged 200k concurrent players for the first two years

Are you old enough to remember Halo 3? Or rather, did you even play Halo 3?
It definitely did not fail to get big traction. At 13 million copies sold it helped sell millions of consoles and gave the 360 a huge starting lead last gen. It also was able to maintain hundreds of thousands of concurrent peak player count for up to 3 years after its release. Halo's downfall only really started with Halo 4.
We've never really seen an RTS where each unit was a unit engaging in FPS behavior, not to my knowledge. It would be new and pretty wild, but the computing requirements would be pretty nutty I bet. 
It's a sandbox, but not an open-world sandbox. You can have open-world games with linear objectives and railroaded toolsets, and vice-versa.

A good half of levels like The Silent Cartographer (I've played a lot more of Halo 1 than 3) are sandbox-style arenas chained together. You're given a few tools and an immediate objective and otherwise given free reign to fight the way you want. No corridors or forced weaponry.
Something like this might honestly be more likely to generate interest in r/gamedev
Honestly I’ll take the trade off since it’s meant a bit more positivity in this sub. How negative and cynical this sub was especially compared to now was really unbearable.
Forge is improving in its complexity and what you cna do... but...

Halo 5 textures, lighting and objects look HORRENDOUS in forge. Compare halo 5 forged maps, and their overall look and feel to halo 3. 

It’s laughable. Halo 3 forge maps look amazing, while h5 look like 2002 games... :( 


The custom game support was a way too late in the games life. 
Didn't mean to write the 3, I meant in general. The Forge in Halo 5 is amazing and should be promoted more by the devs (I hate how Halo: Forge on PC had such a silent release)
Yeah but the incorporated that stuff into Reach, sure the forge is good now but it's 3 years on from a game with good gunplay and bad mechanics that takes up 100gb of your Xbox. Not worth it at all.
Not with an internal editor. Far Cry is the closest, maybe. 
Halo “infinite” describes its expected lifetime: infinite.

It’s a service. A game as a service. 


2009-2014 (Minecraft marks the start of this, and rightly so, the flood  (no pun intended) of Early Access zombie survival games was the end) was the golden age for Indie IMO, it's still good but then it was awesome
Ah well, I'm 26 and while fortnite isn't my thing I don't take issue with it. It must be pretty fun since so many people play it. 
Honestly think that if Halo 3 were released today it'd be a phenomenon again
Does it have firefight? That mode sounds like a lot of fun to me. Also, can you add bots?
It just sucks that you can’t add bots :/ I remember spending hours playing matches of Timesplitters with my friends and bots 
They also released the Chill Out remake, Cold Storage, for free.

Of course, if you wanted to play it in matchmaking at the time, you needed to purchase the Legendary Map Pack for 800 Microsoft Points (fuck those points).
Thanks Don Mattrick! :/
You are wrong the heroic map pack is interesting really. Bungie in 2007 was a small group of talented developers that just wanted to make a great game, the executive BS you see these days is not the same company. The DLC costed money at release, and was publicly said to be free that spring. DLC playlists were added, nothing was removed (at least due to DLC, playlists were pretty dynamic)

&#x200B;

Halo 3 did have DLC locks eventually but that was not really a big factor until they made ODST which came with all Halo 3 DLC.

&#x200B;

I went online with Halo 3 March 3 08, and I did not get the Heroic pack until it was free, and guess what when I first started playing all I played was BTB.  Literally first thing I fired up, I remember it fondly. If you are going to shit on old Bungie at least get your facts straight.
[removed]
Nah, Halo's downfall started with a combination of Reach and MMS taking off via CoD 4. Yearly game releases became a thing and Halo was never that. 
>We've never really seen an RTS where each unit was a unit engaging in FPS behavior, not to my knowledge. It would be new and pretty wild, but the computing requirements would be pretty nutty I bet. 

Men of War comes very close to fitting the definition. Assault Squad is great if you wanna check it out.


That's my understanding as well. FPS games just have less AI than RTS games so they can have smarter logic for each of them individually.

You also want it to be more strategic and predictable in an RTS. If your units are too smart, it's not fun for you to control and if your enemies are too unpredictable, it's too hard or annoying to be prepared.
Company of heroes springs to mind, the way squads shoot at each other and use cover.
[deleted]
That doesn't make it a sandbox
/r/truegaming fills a gaming discussion void sometimes. has been awhile since I've been on there though.
I hope that with Xbox now able to haves mods and things like that for Bethesda games that they input something like this for Halo Infinite so you could add your own textures and things to forge so everything doesn't look so samey. I doubt it will happen though. 
Three months after the game's release was "way too late" for you, huh? I feel sorry for you with an attention span that short.
That's kind of what I mean. I hope that's the case, if done well that could mean endless Halo content! 
Halo 3 ODST does and I believe the game came with Halo 3 multiplayer on a second disk.  You are unable to add friendly bots but with Firefight mode you can go 1 v all the enemies ha

Reach has this as well I just didn't care for all the new elements Reach added; felt very COD like.
holly shit I totally forgot about those points. That takes me back.

I remember map packs were always 800 points but you could only buy points in increments of 500 or 1000 so you always had some left over.
I do have my facts straight. I remember trying to play BTB and it saying "You do not have all the maps for this playlist."
>Bungie in 2007 was a small group of talented developers that just wanted to make a great game, 

Is that why Jason Jones checked out during development?  Bungie was not "small" in 2007. MS had just bought them a giant new office to fit the huge influx of people for Halo 3 (May. They were already tired of Halo and the senior people were basically looking forward to Destiny.

Edit: You replied and deleted while I was responding, but you are right, Maybe MS didn't "buy" the building. However, the move to the new building was done prior to the split from MS, while Bungie was still owned by them. They also needed a new building to fit the team, which was large at the time. It wasn't some small group of handpicked devs completing a passion project like you make it seem.
That isn't a reliable source, considering that they think branching narratives are an example of emergent gameplay.
That same page you linked states:

> A sandbox game is also known as an open-world or free-roaming game.

Which I would say isn't true when you look at some open world games such as Witcher 3. The terms aren't interchangeable.

I'd agree that Halo's campaign itself might not qualify as a sandbox, but the custom games sure do.
We're getting downvoted for pointing out the obvious. Halo has always been linear not a sandbox, this comment section is full of idiots.
/r/truegaming has a bit of a track record of focusing on discussing and not debate though. It’s pretty frequent that I’ll go into a comment thread and say something like “I overall agree with the discussion going on, but there can be exceptions like X” or “there are still issues with Y, so I understand the concern and think the opinions are valid” only to get downvoted almost exclusively. They seem to like discussion as long as everyone agrees, which still isn’t what I want out of a good subreddit.
People may also enjoy /r/VideoGameAnalysis 
Well it’s be fine if they had ACTUAL good textures, and allowed us to tweak some settings, such as scaling, size, diffuse color, noise, luster, ambient lighting, etx. 
Three months? Custom games didnt get good support until nearly a year after launch. If you're referring to them adding janky and broken assault, griffball, ctf, oddball, and king of the hill, then you're not talking about the right time frame. 
I really don’t want this...

I want a SOLID release every 4 years. 

I don’t want to be milked for drip fed content. I don’t want grindy systems, simply designed to lengthen content longevity, simply to give a small amount of content to grind. 

Games as a service are simply not as content rich, fully featured, or complete packages, compared to a full release. 

They just make more money by drip feeding content... 
Ok thanks for the tips, appreciate you!
If you had to use Microsoft Points on another third party currency which left you even more change it was frustrating as hell
That is not true MS points were sold at 1600 and 4000 respectively. 

You buy a map pack and you are left with $10 (800 MS points)...

&#x200B;

The system works fine for MSRP stuff, it is when you add deals and other small purchases to the equation. Once you break the multiples of $5 that is when the store became a massive headache, as the store grew the worse standardized prizing got. By the time the end of the MS point era came you had indies for $15, xda for as low as $1, you had avatar stuff, gamerpics, and a vastly growing store front with constant sales.
Look man if you want I can dig up the details, 

Halo heroic map pack was a planned free piece of content that was restricted to DLC playlists when it launch that winter at premium price. 

you are wrong, sorry. 
I'd agree that the forge mode is a sandbox but stating that the campaign is sandbox is ridiculous.
Your problem is that you think sandbox means it HAS to be an open world game like Red Dead or Assassin's Creed, when it really means a type of gameplay design that doesn't restrict the players choices on how to tackle problems presetened to them. And how the player, gameplay systems, and AI can interact with each other in a number of different ways. Game design like that isn't restricted to open world games. Halo has a series of levels, mechanics, and even a whole spin off game based around these design principals.
> this comment section is full of idiots

Here are two in fact!
> They seem to like discussion as long as everyone agrees, which still isn’t what I want out of a good subreddit.

It is tough to maintain a community like that. Most folk on reddit are not "intellectuals" and aren't able to divorce themselves from their personal feelings or understand the framework of a discussion. You can't really do objective discussions about things when people aren't willing to treat it academically/impartially. It doesn't help that reddit "empowers" folks to believe that their opinion is worth the same as anyone else's opinion by giving them the ability to up/downvote content regardless of how informed/objective it is or isn't. 

So far my favorite place to talk about games is over at /r/patientgamers though. Folks who are willing to wait for games and aren't as invested in those franchises are usually willing to be a bit more impartial about them. That's a sad bit of Witcher 3 and Dark Souls circlejerking from time to time, but honestly that's almost inescapable in general so you take what you can get. 

No, I'm talking about forge and custom games, which released December the year the game came out, under three months from the release date.
Yes and no.

Early on in the Xbox 360's lifecycle if you were buying MS points with a credit card you could only do so in 500 or 1000 point increments, the cards were always 1600 or 4000. It took them until 2010 or so to change the credit card purchases to reflect the card ones.
[Post from 2010](https://www.bungie.net/en-US/Forums/Post/2261632) where people are telling this guy he needs all the DLCs to play Social Big Team Battle.
The campaign is definitely several sandboxes
By your definition then a huge percentage of games are sandboxes which ridiculous. Search for the sandbox tag on steam and see what you games you get.
But most of the time when people write something negative about witcher or dark souls they don't get downvoted into oblivion. I really like how accepting the community is of other's opinions. One of my favourite subs overall, my only problem is that discussions tend to repeat.
The thing is, the game didn't have enough sustainability to last 3 months imo.  You completed the campaign in a few hours, never went back to it because it's an awful campaign, then went and played one of the few modes on multiplayer (there were 5 on release, 5). All of which were competitive, I don't mind comp, it's fun from time to time but it was always tryhards, there was no just social slayer where you can mess about for a bit, challenge yourself by only using the magnum or something.

There was that warmode though right? Yeah well that mode sucked, between the shitty ai and the lootboxes, and the 3 maps on release, it got boring fast.

After a month (generous I know), you'd done everything. It was only months later when it started to get a few more maps, modes etc and finally forge but by then it was too little too late
Soyou're talking about when the custom games came out with none of those game modes. When it was still barebones.     
Custom games and forge not being in the game on release as they should have been.    
That isn't custom games support to brag about. A year after release when the custom games were finally robust is when to brag about. Also, custom games servers were not implemented until much later than 3 months. 
>When the first DLC Map Pack came out, they took away literally THE ONLY playlist that I played.

You give me something from a time unrelated to your post....

&#x200B;

As I said you are wrong....
I can claim things that make no sense too. HEY GUYS CALL OF DUTY IS THE BEST INDIE PUZZLE ADVENTURE FRANCHISE EVER MADE, PROVE ME WRONG! See?
There's difference between a sandbox game and a sandbox. I would consider a sandbox game to be an open world game. A sandbox within a game is a space that allows for creativity and improvisation. A good example would be something like Half Life 2 where you have a sort of sandbox where you can play around with the physics and mechanics of the game like you can in a Halo game.
*Whistles* Howdy! Now isn't that a fine amount of goalpost moving! You'd think it was a kid's soccer league there!
My point is that Bungie has a history of locking people out of content they had at launch, regardless of the timeline. 
Have you played Halo
Or Hitman, which has a bunch of sandboxes connected with a linear story and progression.
Lmao tetris and pac man are sandbox games then
Fucking 343i defense team.

Halo 5 is trash and always will be. 3 months is way too late and nobody is going to stick around waiting for features to be added that should have been there since launch. I dont buy a steak to have half of it come after I finish the first half. 
Your point is irrelevant when your reasoning is wrong....
A billion times, you?
Yeah that's another really good example.
Wow. You have issues. It takes a disturbed individual to look at someone caught in a lie and go "Yeah, well ... they're right anyway because I like what they say!"

You must have voted last election.
Hes not wrong though 
Yeah man, we just disagree on what sandbox means. I think calling Halo linear is kinda misleading, each scenario is ripe for being played around with.
Making something deeper than it is? Youre way overthinking shit about a video game. Did I offend you that much? Relax bronie.
Perhaps you both are daff, I literally used his quote about how when the first DLC came out BTB became locked behind it. He was wrong, and his way to identify his claim was from a post 3 years after the map pack came out. 

Sorry you guys have poor comprehension skills.
Just because you can engage things in different ways doesn't make it a sandbox dude. The same way that World of Warcraft isn't a sandbox either, it's called a theme park MMO because of how on rails the gameplay is. And something like Eve Online or Minecraft are sandbox because of the amount of freedom and lack of objectives. 
How was he wrong?
https://youtu.be/iHSs3pjuyug 

At 6:22 even one of Halos developers calls it a sandbox game. There's a whole boat load of these developer diaries from Bungie and I can recall them using the term "sanbox" to describe their gameplay systems a few times besides this video. 

Edit: again, at 5:59 in that same video, they have a developer with the title of "Lead Sandbox Designer"

Wow once again

He said 

BTB was unplayable for those without DLC when the first map released, and he is wrong. 

BTB had no such thing until shortly after Halo 3 ODST which came out at the end of 2009. 

It is a wrong point of reference, and the argument really does not hold if you use the right point of reference which would have been along the lines of 

I played Halo 3 before it got DLC and when I fired it up 3 years later after multiple revisions I could not play BTB. It is quite the different story. 

Ultimately someone is trying to throw people under the bus based on false information, I get it Bungie sucks now, but if you want to attack them for breathing life into a dying game 2-3 years after it came in out and asking for your money in the process you can just GTFO. 

You had people that charge $15 a month and $60 a year for GaaS games, and we want to be up in arms over requiring you to spend maybe like $60 after years of free support  to refresh a game. Things were different than Halo 3 is a prime example of paid DLC problems in the way you would not think. It did not split a community, it just added $10 playlists with new maps people played for a week or two. It is safer to say map packs were a waster of money and added nothing to the base experience of the game

The game had three core alterations

1) Base release game 

2) Heroic map being free

3) Halo 3 ODST - when all content became universal and required money. 

Halo 3 after ODST was a new behemoth with maps for your maps in all playlists. I played Halo 3 for years, and if some run of a mill Joe who fires Halo 3 up after not playing it for 2-3 years wants to get his panties in a bunch that is his problem. I needed the 'expansion' that was integrating all DLC into the core experience. 

Paid MP DLCs are a joke, because despite what people say they are not paywalls they are broken promises for those actually willing to pay for more. Only game series that did not have this problem was BF, but it had a plethora of other paid DLC problems. 

TL;DR

I played Halo 3 for 3+years regularly and bought 4 map packs and then ODST, and I can tell you first hand Halo 3 never locked the core modes behind DLC paywalls until they made a standardized rerelease in the form of ODST, which was 2+ years after the game launched well after the first DLC as OP claims.
The hardest part about everything currently labeled AI is that its not AI, its SI. It's simulated intelligence, call and responses that seem like intelligence (both video games and chat programs). Even considering an RPG that incorporates chat "AI" into dialogue would be too viable to be trusted. The tech isn't there.
Here's a secret... Many times developers have to make AI worse so that they don't beat the player's ass. Capcom could make a Street fighter that's impossible to beat. Any first person shooter could have AI land perfect shots on you and move in a completely erratic fashion.
People think they want smarter, more realistic ai in games, but they don't. It's hard to design enjoyable and predictable experiences with an ai that's too smart, and behavioral AI is way harder to design than chatgpt-like ai that's just a language model. Many game developers have talked about that, and that's why the last time we've seen a smart AI was in F.E.A.R that came out almost 20 years ago

If you just want more realistic npc dialog in games, gpt integration in games is already a thing.
NPC dialogue seems like the natural fit for it, and games that are already heavily reliant on procedural generation.

I don't know as our current AI tech is good enough for it, but realizing what a game like Daggerfall was trying to do seems like something that could make really good use of AI.

When it comes to actual enemy AI, I hear a lot of stories about developers trying to have smarter AI and testers simply not liking it and thinking it's cheap. It's hard to make an AI that is both smart *and* fun to fight against.
Where AI will be most useful in gaming is in development, not the actual gameplay. At least that's my prediction.

Edit: I take that back. Kind of. AI could be really cool in something like a stealth based PvE. Like, imagine you're Sam Fisher and you have to outsmart and outstealth an AI assassin or some shit. That would be interesting to see.
AI can do a lot of things. 

But there are also a lot of things only a human can do.
Nope.  Video game AI is mostly parlor tricks, smoke, and mirrors.  Even games historically touted for amazing AI (like FEAR or MGS) just had standard AI and used stage design and scripted sequences to make the AI appear clever. But, it's all vision cones, hotbox triggers, and nested if/then statements. 

Now, chat AIs have become a trendy topic of discussion and everyone is romanticizing and overblowing them. But that's a chat AI.  It's for absorbing words, organizing them, and spitting them back out in coherent sequences to give the illusion of intelligence. It doesn't learn so much as acquire and regurgitate.   It's bacially this generations flying car or moon colony.  Even the OpenAI Ceo knows what I'm saying. He looks at chatAI as fairly crude and simple. 

In order for video game AI to get better, it has to be able to see it's environment (while understanding what it sees), have positional awareness, and anticipate deception. The StarCraft AI project already proved that to be outside the abilities of modern AI. It couldn't get out of gold rank and needed map hacks.  They copied a pro and created a dozen copies of that, then pitted them against one another for like months, then beat the pro.  That's what got written about - not the reality of it's limitations.
In many ways.  Pathfinding, adaptive difficulty, AI generated dialog, NPC behavior.
Honestly the peak of video game AI was like 10 years ago with npc invaders in Dark Souls 2
No, current AI stuff is not the same as game AI. There isn't even a correlation, game AI is literally not Artificial Intelligence. It would, at best, be what you actually described here. Not improving NPC AI, but using AI to track in-game stuff and produce little voice clips or whatever. Actually developing more convincing enemy AI is a whole separate, massive thing, which I dont think some GPT-like AI could help you with.
Probably not, but they'll be able to tell you to go eff yourself now and call you a hacker.
Yo, NPCs w/Chat GPT!? My mind is melting.
The current language model advancements may impact games eventually, but they are so computationally expensive that it will be a while before we see anything running on the game hardware itself.

Most likely the earliest impact will be language models being run on the cloud as an input into the game.  This means that there will be significant cost to hooking this up, so it would have to be a major draw of the game to be worthwhile.
You can’t implement such AI into games because they are unpredictable and will do random things, which for games can mean bugs, getting stuck on a level, random issues, random behavior etc. 

Same as if you told all actors on set of a movie to improvise all their lines, and hope for a good movie. But at least actors are human and know how to behave. AI doesnt and would do random things that dont make sense.

Games need to be tightly controlled in order to deliver the vision and quality the makers of the game intended for you to have. And putting a random AI that does random stuff is just a lousy bet.
Probably won't happen for a while, the current ai models that can do this stuff are quite hard to run, you can only get fast results in a datacenter. And as they live on the GPU, a powerful pc that could run it wouldn't have any resources left for the rest of the game.   


But yeah, once it becomes viable, either by dedicated hardware (like what apple is doing with their ai cores), or paired down specialized models that are easier to run, I see ai generated voices as having the most potential. (especially for things like rpgs where its been a bottleneck for how complex the dialog trees can get)
10000x

Its cool, but chatGPT is basically just condensed google currently.
Tech may not be there now, but within 2 years out entire social existence will be transformed, fingers crossed for the better.
And also a player's perspective of what is a fair AI usually is skewed in favor of the player. Your comment reminded me of an article, I cannot remember the game, of a FPS game being developed and they wanted to add smarter AI.

So they programmed some enemies to be able to flank the player. You'd encounter a group of enemies, they'd fire on you, an enemy would yell "Go flank them!" and a small group of the enemies will attempt to walk around obstacles or other rooms and flank the player.

Well what ended up happening in playtests was that they got a lot of complaints of "enemies being able to spontaneously appear behind you without any warning." Even though they made sure enemies would be yelling orders to each other to flank the players. They found out players generally would tunnel vision enemies in front of them, and having a smarter AI that could circle around the player was too unfair from a player's perspective.
That last part is what everyone else seems to think as well

But i think as AI is improved and expanded upon in the next decade we're going to start seeing it used for alot of things that as of right now, sound unthinkable, and alot of it is  probably unpredictable, but I think with time, almost anything you can think of and more is going to be possible. Maybe i should have phrased the post like; assuming there are no limitations to AI, what sort of features would you like to see in games using AI?
OpenAI from dota could beat pros, so it’s within the realm of possibility for current day AI
This is true, but you’re also glossing over how impressive this technology actually is right now. ChatGPT is *almost* a real life example of Searle’s “Chinese Room”. If anyone doesn’t know what that is, look it up.

So, it underscores how and why a conscious artificial general intelligence cannot be created solely algorithmically, without hardware redesign, as modern neuroscience theories such as Integrated Information Theory suggest. But, it also means that *if* we somehow accidentally create a “true AI”, it may be damn hard for us to realize it. Conversely, if someone *deliberately* created one and released it on the world, it may be damn hard to recognize it for the same reason.

Simulated intelligence technology will probably change our world in ways that are difficult to predict right now, and that’s without the inevitable offshoots and advancements that will occur. Saying it is “this generation’s flying car or moon colony” is a huge understatement. As a neurologist, I find this technology to be somewhat scary because it is a great example of what neuroscientists, philosophers of mind and AI researchers have been saying for *decades* now, and I personally didn’t expect it to be culturally adopted so fast.

I think all of us would love a smarter Alexa. It’s what comes afterwards that is potentially problematic, and it is totally up to humans to determine the trajectory that artificial intelligence research goes in. Without being too alarmist, now is the time that we should be thinking about the ethical, cultural and legal ramifications of it - not after the fact. To think that we will do AI research responsibly is hopelessly naive in my opinion. Pretty much all of human history disproves that thought.
AI in the RE remakes are super impressive.
Yeah, I want to say this was something a Bungie dev said or potentially FEAR devs from monolith but those enemies actually do flank sometimes.
This is a friendly reminder to [read our rules](https://www.reddit.com/r/Showerthoughts/wiki/rules).

Remember, /r/Showerthoughts is for showerthoughts, not "thoughts had in the shower!"

(For an explanation of what a "showerthought" is, [please read this page](https://www.reddit.com/r/Showerthoughts/wiki/overview).)

**Rule-breaking posts may result in bans.**
Some mad lads in the Skyrim modding community have done this, albeit only in a rough prototype and the response time can be a bit long, but it’s a feasible concept

Whether that’s a good thing or not is up for debate.
I wonder if the npcs will get bored and beat the game for the hero?
I can't wait for an AI NPC to [hallucinate](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hallucination_\(artificial_intelligence\)) false tips on how to complete a quest.
You know? I think the closest we've experienced in the past is Psycho Mantis in Metal Gear Solid; reads your memory card and gives specific responses on certain games.
I can't wait for a Zelda NPC to say, "Are you okay? You were cooking over there, non-stop, for hours."
"As an AI language model I am incapable of going on an adventure with you. Is there something else I can help you with today?"
Doki Doki is going to lose a lot of its impact in the age of AI
You seem hopelessly lost! All the NPCs are talking about you. My conscious won't allow me to give you the quest I normally hand out. Would you like me to teleport you back to the tutorial zone, or perhaps uninstall the game entirely?
Yeah and the game will be 2000 gigs, require a 24/7 internet access, permission to use your mic/location, access to your email address, your full legal name and social, cost $120 dollars, and then 3 years later when the ai companies and game companies have a disagreement they'll remove the ai and leave dialogue-less npcs.
Actually, it's not in the interest of the game developer  to put advanced Ai for NPCs. Firstly because it's expansive in calculation (but soon this won't be a problem anymore as OP said), secondly because the developer needs to know/predict what the NPC will do, in order to make and control the best game design.
I’m not so sure about pretty soon. 

Games are hardly delivering on new concepts today. Just think about the best games in the last five years: they deliver an extremely polished version of what already existed. We really haven’t seen significant innovation, just better versions of what we already know. RDR2 might be the only exception in the way that the world moved around you. 

Granted, AI might make that easier.
There is a demo mod for skyrim that does exactly that, plus a companion mod that work with chatgpt.
Seen this mentioned elsewhere.  It is a very good use case for Ai.
Of course; why wouldn’t a corporation want to replace a bunch of human writing jobs with an AI? That’s all entertainment media will be if this keeps up. Three companies will own everything, and they’ll have whatever top AI programs of the day making all their products, licensed for a less than the salary of one man.
I'd prefer NPCs being able to properly pronounce my characters‘ names. It'd be so much more immersive instead of only being called dragonborn in the 58th rema(ke/ster) of the game.

Skyrim VRAIRT 4K
Games are moving towards the long awaited closeness to reality. It is already possible, but there are no such games yet. I have no doubt that efforts already exist to accomplish this.

AI-generated responses are just better known in the mainstream these days. But many more features are coming, such as real-time fluid simulation, human characters realistic to the point of being mistaken for real people, and the light simulation that just got better to the point where several light simulation issues are resolved.
It is also expected that quantum computers will be possible in 5 years, so we will eventually have superior processing and storage when this becomes available to the average user in a few years.

The [Two Minute Papers](http://youtube.com/@TwoMinutePapers) YouTube channel showcases many of these advancements.
I wonder if this will make DnD Game Masters obsolete. Like everyone just talks to an AI that knows the story and everyones stats and will generate answers depending on that.
Animal crossing knew when I hit the reset button without saving; and the npc for sure let me know about it.
There was an indie VR game a few years ago that used AI for NPCs and theyll have conversations with you about anything. I saw youtube video of it during the pandemic.
Responsive dialogue is already a thing but AI would make It more viable
That would be sick! Could you imagine randomly generated missions?
For indie games sure, but for bigger games it will take at least 3 to 4 years to make something really impressive.
Why limit it to just gaming history? You have an enormous digital footprint out there for AI to tap into.

Don't be surprised if NPCs start talking about topics related to your YouTube viewing history, products you've looked up on Amazon or political movements you've donated to. From there it's a short hop to embedded advertising.
Well it’s cool the data privacy concerns are insane and should not be put into games until we have government regulation on what can be done with data collected from us while playing.
This isn't really a shower thought, just an obvious observation. 🤔 

A real shower thought about this would be more like: soon people will be forming better relationships with npcs in games they play than with people in their actual life.
Plz, a game where AI is trained on LoL and CS:GO ingame chat
Something like this can give the socially awkward a way to practice. Better than nothing anyway, which is what many have.
I think we'll see it earlier as narrators. It takes a pretty simple and cheap model to comment on how your 2k custom player has been performing this season.
"Mankind is doomed to an existence under the rule of robots, and there's nothing you can do to stop us"

"Excuse me?"

"I mean, I have a letter here to deliver directly to you"
But first, AI language models with training have to be less taxing on the GPU. I'd say it's only possible after people are able to run 30B models on 6gb vram.
[deleted]
There's the mod, but I wouldn't be surprised if skyrim came out again with this integrated in the game. 

I can already picture the NPC's saying:

"Aren't you that fucker that keeps shouting all day long? I haven't had a good night sleep in weeks."
That dude trying to get me to rescue a settlement better not try to guilt trip me after saying no a couple times
We already have that. I started Shouting and after the graybeards called me to High Hrothgar, some guy named  Miraak sent cultists after me. I killed them both, but it was scary never the less.
We'll likely only see one or two games like that. Just like the nemesis system from the Shadow of Mordor games, someone will copyright the AI system and then never use it again, just to block other companies from making money.
Imagine how dull Disco Elysium would be if characters just stood around reciting Wikipedia descriptions of the plot.

“As your limbic system, I cannot tell you about your ex-wife. I am involved with lower order emotional processing of input from…”

Imagine Portal, except GlaDOS narrates EVERYTHING you do in a robotic monotone.

Ugh.
Given some of the things we do in video games, I'm not entirely sure I want this to happen.
Jeez, and I thought video game writing couldn’t get any worse.
This is the AI in video games that I am really excited for. Don’t use it to write stories or make major components but use it to make NPCs come alive. Have them do realistic stuff and make genuine comments on my actions.
Games with voice acting would struggle to do this IMO. It would be plain as day with the crunchy AI voice.
reality: first company that does this patent the thing and no one can ever use it again

edit: as it was with the nemesis system using AI to improve NPCs combat in shadows of mordor
And at what point do the AI get too sentient to make playing the game ethical
I'm excited for games with entirely fleshed out lore that each NPC is only programmed with select knowledge. All questions can be typed out, and all dialog responses are AI generated based on preprogrammed specific knowledge of lore.
Soon we will also have AI generated mouths for over dubbing of films. So, for example, if the film is shot in English and dubbed over with Spanish we won’t be able to tell it was even shot in English.
There’s actually a few games with this mechanic already. One I’m pretty sure that has this is a game called Rain World.
It would be cool for VR games. Essentially AI actors in every role that could answer any question I asked them, within that characters perimeters. But then this also means you would have to teach an AI to be able to lie.
No we won’t. Just a reminder, no one has created actual AI yet. What you’re seeing in todays markets is just marketing lingo and software.
Finally, a reasonable prediction for AI. I swear some people seem to think AI is gonna be wiping their asses for them in the next few years 🙄.
[removed]
[deleted]
[deleted]
It's kinda funny I just had the same thought yesterday when thinking about Skyrim. It really won't be far off. I wouldn't be surprised if we start seeing it to some extent by the end of the decade, maybe even sooner.
Imagine Minecraft villagers equipped with AI to help them build and utilize villages better. Maybe even give the player the ability to chat with them through a text interface on the trading screen. You could ask if there's anything interesting nearby, what resources they need for their village, attempt to convince them to lower prices, or just have a chat.

Hell, you could come to form memorable relationships with certain villagers, like "oh yeah that's Tony the Blacksmith, he helped me find a woodland mansion and a couple of ruined portals so I built him a bigger house."
That would be a welcome change. Usually these games are isolating - you are just doing your mission by yourself
Generated NPC content will all be advertisements. Some for micro transactions, some for IRL products, but all opportunities for you to spend more money.
This will be great for Sim games. Imagine raising a baby that's learning, but you can teach it to steal and use daggers.
Wait until bosses are AI. They learn not only what strategy you are using to beat them, but also what everyone else in the world is doing. Then they adapt to counter.
Everyone’s beloved Animal Crossing then became racist and they had to kill the game :(
About damn time RPGs got "next gen". Most of the current RPGs are based on the open world formula of Dragon age Inquisition/The Witcher 3 and those games  were published in 2014-15.
[deleted]
Look at game industry rn and say it again. We are going down the slope. Maybe Kojima will do it his next game, others? Nah

Edit: If it will reduce costs in the end, then after first titles every game will be like it.
Let's just hope they can generate better radiant quests.

Also, how long until some jackhole "teaches" the AI to spam NPC responses with derogatory slurs?
We already have. I researched and created some systems for this early in my master's degree a couple of years ago.
There will be many bad implementations of this at first but one day, oh boy, one day somebody is going to nail it and the immersion is going to be fucking unreal.
Imagine all the lore in a the game is tailored according to your actions, like if every book you find in Skyrim is a full novel writen by AI on the spot but somehow tailored to your gameplay.   I can also imagine games like No Man's Sky could benefit a lot from this, since almost all of their NPC's are randomly generated.
It's really a dream tbh, utilising LLMs to generate plot in realtime. Maybe the game will only be shipped with an overarching main questline and a set of side quests, but the majority of the full quest list — and maybe the fine details — are entirely AI generated in realtime. The game can be potentially never-ending yet non-repetitive.
Pretty soon people will Google if something is a thing before posting on reddit that something will become a thing
[Check out this experiment of using ChatGPT to give an NPC life-like conversation skills.](https://youtu.be/7xA5K7fRmig)
You still gonna kill all those npc’s now that they’ll be using previous encounters etc to beg for their lives? lol
it probably makes the in-game world more dynamic and immersive
Don't tell that to the dragon age developer's we won't see dreadwold until 2055
we are so "close" to the (VR) generative games where X quest can affect Y quest but also the Z quest of another player if you finish something.  (look for World's Strongest Troll manhwa as a small example)
Question: Wouldn't that be just a "cosmetic" thing in a sense? 

NPC responses are limited to what the player can ask, given the obvious and necessary limitations that must be kept in order to have a cohesive storyline.

So, realistically, wouldn't that just be kinda the same as if having pre planned NPC dialogue that corresponds with your in game actions?
I wonder how hard it would be to make an AI NPC fall in love. Better raise my charisma.
I saw this episode of Star Trek and it didn't turn out so well.
Spacebourne 2 has AI generated quests, interactions and voices.
I think there are mods already in the works for Skyrim and Stardew valley.
As long as big studios are milking absolute cash cows of minimum effort games, smaller studios are just going to rinse and repeat their efforts and no actual progress will ever happen.
Didn't Rockstar patent something like this about a year ago? It's believed to have something to do with GTA 6 and the NPCs in future titles.
And it will be interesting the first time it happens, but then never again after that.
Don't get your hopes up too soon about how good it will be out how it will even effect your gameplay.
Games can already do that fairly simply, assuming we’re talking about an rpg like Skyrim. If you’ve completed a certain quest line or have a certain amount of karma etc the npc’s can and do address you differently, it just depends how deep the devs want to go with it.
I'll just be minding my business in eso then some random npc goes "you let that woman murder that doctor in phaer! Shame on you!" And i think its the only negative npc post-quest mention i ever get
Pretty soon there will be AI that read stuff from outside of the game and start judging you for other things you’re doing. Or the hours that you’re playing at. 

“It’s 2AM again. Don’t you have work in the morning?”

*responses generated by AI appear on a dialogue wheel*
And someone will use it for something pornagraphic immediately.
They can just pay actors to record more voicelines. AI should only come into play with saying custom character names.
"You've been here doing the same thing day in, day out, for weeks my friend! You scream out in frustration your pleas for recompense for your time to no avail, yet still you return, venturing deep into these catacombs each night. What is your purpose in suffering, adventurer? Why do you insist on tormenting yourself? What possible thing could you gain in being here? Is it treasure you seek from this pixelated realm beneath the maze of wires and circuitry, or is it merely an escape from an ever more grim reality outside of these generated walls?"
Don’t forget recommending DLC and bonus content you can buy in an in-world appropriate fashion.
what i want most is for AI voice to be able to finally pronounce my custom character name.
Then AI combat that learns from its and your mistakes, learns our patterns, and becomes so ungodly overpowered nobody can get a single kill… then they’ll get out…
What would make it cooler is they also react to your social media posts.
Why limit it to your recent "in-game occurrences"?  I can imagine an AI NPC that looks at your Amazon purchases or your Goodreads book ratings and modifying its personalities based on the type of fantasy books you read.  Or one that takes elements of its backstory based on your travel history, favoring whatever in-game culture is most similar to places you go on vacation.  Etc.

Of course, I can also imagine an NPC that uses your Amazon browsing history that offers you an extra 10,000XP if you purchase this item off Amazon that you've looked at a couple of times but not pulled the trigger on...
More like relevant to your recent purchases and facebook comments
Bold of you to assume that lazy game devs with actually write and voice that amount of dialogue.
I thought about this recently watching a video of an ancient game called Lords of the Realm 2. It's a precursor to 4k strategy games and it has diplomacy. The fun thing is that when you send someone a diplomatic message you write it out yourself. I always thought it was a quirky feature. Obviously overall meaningless as the AI always reacts the same regardless, but it now you could have AI react to the actual message, which would be fantastic.
That’s actually kinda weak, the AI could go online and skim news articles and pick up relevant REAL world information and talk to a player about it. Imagine playing a game set in the current day and the NPC can ask you things like “Did you catch the game?” Or say things like “Man I wish the Ukrainian war would stop.”  

The game would never get old because it would constantly talk to you as if it was current day.
This is going to suck for a good while, but at some point it actually will get implemented well and make for some really unique "living world" type shit.

But man, those first few years are going to be rough
yeah cool but can i make npc suicidal to the point he know he is in a game and his existance doesn't bring anything to my storylane = he is usless
Soon it will be hard to tell if you play with real person in your favorite mmorpg
Someone has actually started doing this on the unity sub Reddit for an rpg. Early stages and slow, but a brilliant idea.
I'd say Bethesda already does this. There is no way their NPC:s are MEANT to be like *that*
That actually makes a lot of sense, as I can see that happening!
Implemented correctly into an RPG this will define the next generation of games. Graphics can only get so good. Next is AI performance.
Seriously, it's only going to get crazier from here, graphics are damn near realistic these days so they gotta invest in other newer avenues
That might also mean we can write up our own responses/speeches
I like this but I feel as if voice actors would lose work. Depending on how many companies use it
Actually, using proper AI's to control NPC's, both antagonists and neutral, is probably the best use I can think of for AI's right now.
I felt like the red dead 2 npcs where alive lol used to shame me for the stuff I had done
[removed]
And, as an idea I had for a Black Mirror episode if that show accepted specs shows, what happens when the NPCs become so "alive" core parts of the game become morally questionable to play
I think it would fit in certain games to make them a lot more

Games where npcs are pretty important would be good
As someone who is prone to exhausting dialog trees this idea terrifies me. Every rpg will turn into a socialization simulator. The abject horror!
Right now this would be crazy expensive to use the services or host yourself at scale so any results we see will be heavily compromised by that alone, but that's just a waiting game as it gets cheaper and inference gets easier relative to hardware.

A GPU with 32gb of VRAM could right now hold a rudimentary LLM while also playing a game, but it wouldn't be anywhere close to openAI levels yet.

But with enough local compute resources you could AI generate dialog and then voice-act it in real time with software we have today.
Im scared to load my modded skyrim save
It's neat, but the response time makes it not so great. Once they don't have to sit for 5 to 10 seconds and think of a response it will be really cool
Lol being saying ever since Chat GPTs been getting posted everywhere that this shit will change ES/Fallout games wildly. I cannot wait for it.
Once the process has been ironed out its a game changer 

As long as the initial performance is human captured first. Contracts will start including permissions given for in studio AI scripts to use the performers voice likeness etc.

There is gonna be a wild west expansion moment with ai within gaming very soon. Andnits exciting and scary.

I watched that Skyrim example this morning and while rough it has HUGE potential.
You can already download it:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NNFVyeTBYAU

https://www.nexusmods.com/skyrimspecialedition/mods/89931?tab=posts
I will wait to be terrified until the modern gaming version of that one feature in Eternal Darkness, where it read your memory card and then threatens to delete all your files. Just imagine one of the Skyrim guards starting up with his "I was once an adventurer like you\~" then interrupting himself as he gets a good look at you and makes a joke about your search history or how you plug-pulled in another game.
Yea it’s about an 8 minute wait for a response
I did see someone doing the same thing for new vegas. Looked intresting as a concept
And then another mad lad took that mod and added it into vr. Crazy stuff
Does that mean you can beat Nazeem's ass until he learns respect on your name?
Stardew Valley has a "chat with the NPC" dialogue mod in a closed beta, but that has neither voices nor meaningful interaction(?) with the game world.
Of course Skyrim will be the first.
"Ah, so *you're* the guy who likes putting buckets on peoples' heads, eh?!"
Literally Free Guy
There are games where the ai(bots) started farming and manipulating game markets.
(Edit) I really tried to find the article but can’t filter out all the new ai news.
I know AI is impressive at faking a real conversation but they still don't feel actual emotions. I hope everyone knows this.
If you deploy this concept in a detective game, it becomes a feature not a bug.
But you know.... that kinda works? People misremember or believe in false things all the time. 

So long as that NPCs can the remember its old response when you come back later, I think it could work.
[deleted]
Simple answer: don’t leave that up to ai and let humans determine exactly what should be said and when for tips
“Oh, ho, ho, no… \***I**\* say when we’re *done.*”
I’ve always liked to imagine a modern equivalent.

“You like playing trippy games… like Portal 2, Mayhaps? 

Still don’t believe me? I’ll look deeper, into your SOUL!

*three second pause*

Dear god…”
That shit fucked with 16-18 year old me. Idr exactly when it was, but yah
Wasnt there a similar thing with scarecrow in a batman game iirc?
right?
I somehow really doubt Nintendo would jump on that. They seem the type to want to curate every bit of the game meticulously. I get that they kind of let go a bit with zelda a bit (allowing for more than 1 solution to puzzles). But dialogue is gonna be a step too far for a long time for them, methinks.
That ending FUCKED with me
That wasn't the first one to 4th wall break. It's predecessor was called "You, me and her" I believe.
I can see most of that happening
I can't speak for most of that, but as for the 2000 gigs and price jump, things should be alright. 

A game wouldn't use so much GB unless it was readily available to the general public, or their game will probably bomb. Same could be said for internet speed for downloads. Both of which id be happy to see.

The price of games believe it or not have gone down quite a bit. I'd recommend watching videogamedunkeys video on gaming prices. He has pretty decent humor in it to make it more entertaining.
[deleted]
Eh. More likely we'll need dedicated AI cards that will house a general AI that will get prompts from the game.

They could also use it to replace Cortana/Google/etc.
I doubt we will see Advanced AI for stuff that is integral to the plot anytime soon, but I could totally see AI being used to Generate random conversations among NPCs and that sort of thing.

Oblivion had these random conversations take place that felt really stilted and odd, but they actually did go a long ways towards making the world feel real. Hey I could generate an infinite number of these conversations incredibly easily, and even tailor them specifically to player action.

You know, a player steals something from someone's house, and the next day they are down in the Square complaining that someone stole their vase.
It's pretty ridiculous for you to state that as a fact, there would be plenty of games where AI conversations would add to game design. There are also many where it would not
>I’m not so sure about pretty soon. 

https://youtu.be/d6sVWEu9HWU
Still kinda bitter at [Warner Brothers getting a patent](http://patentarcade.com/2021/02/warner-brothers-granted-patent-for-nemesis-system-from-middle-earth-video-games.html#:~:text=The%20'179%20Patent%20is%20valid,enforce%20its%20patent%20against%20others.) for the Nemesis system from the Middle Earth games.

Probably one of the more unique concepts to come out in gaming and will be 2035 until any developer can use without permission from WB.
Yeah, the average game feels less "Alive" then ones from the 00's, ain't no way the industry is going to suddenly advance way past that other than maybe Rockstar. But that's their whole thing.

Fucking Cyberpunk cam out with all these character options with no effect yet Saints Row 2 actually has NPCs comment if you gave your character a big rack.
I don't remember what the name of this fallacy is but just because something's never been the case doesn't mean it never will be
>> RDR2 might be the only exception in the way that the world moved around you. 

Could you explain how? I’ve never played RDR2 but this intrigues me to start.
Probably the safest place to implement AI.
Bethesda recorded a *lot* of voiceover to (just about) make that possible with one character in fallout 4. From memory the list of accurately pronounced names included fuckface and shithead just for good measure.
CHAMPION!

Honestly I preferred games like mass effect where they just give you a name
Say what you will about fallout 4 but the butler robot calling you by your name is incredible and blew my mind on my first playthrough.
It may help those who want to play games like DnD but have no one around to party up with... or just want to play solo.
Doubt it. I know for certain that I would rather play with my friends at one of our places in person. I don't think anything will beat the shenanigans that ensue when 4-8 adult nerds meet up in a room to roll dice and play pretend.
When I first played New Horizons, I thought it automated, so I decided to quit after setting up the tent to download a random house item from the Nintendo store. My little animal friends were deleted from existence. And the worst thing is I don't even use what I downloaded.
I think 3-4 years might even be generous for the end-goal. Soon is a pretty relative word.
[deleted]
Sounds like a huge breach in privacy, not like it's anything that hasn't been done before. For the sake of ethics and ease of use, I would hope that accessible information would be confined to the game itself.
Epic NPC Man did a vid here recently where a random guard vows to find the player in real life.
AI needs a testing ground, releasing it publicly on everything is dangerous because we don't have active constraints on the information it consumes and how it utilizes it.

Video games are an excellent medium for a testing ground.
A model doesn't _have_ to be ran on some server. It can be relatively small and computationally cheap. (Take a look at things on r/LocalLLaMA, for example)  

Relatively.

It's not _great_ on current hardware, but things like [TPUs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tensor_Processing_Unit) are becoming more and more common in consumer hardware.  

At this point in time, we're doing the equivalent of running games with CPU-based rendering, instead of using GPUs.  

In 5-10 years dedicated AI-accelerators (be it built-in into CPUs/GPUs or as entirely separate modules) might become something much more common.
What you commented can also be seen as an obvious observation
Makes me wonder if/how AI could be used in the future for therapy. Having friend/relationship simulators for those with crippling disorders to ease into the waters at their own pace without worrying about hurting others' feelings.
NPC:Hey lets drive to this mission while i tell you about our new sponsor
You could do a comedy mod where they call you out for everything you do:

"Stop shooting fireballs at my house, you asshole!"

"Why did you kill my wife and steal her keys?"

"Why do you come by here every 3 days and take all my wheat and chicken eggs?"

"Diddn't i just buy 45 steel swords from you an hour ago?"
Imagine AI npc in gta chasing you
No, you don't. Just don't teach them the truth. If they need to later contradict themselves, replace it with a similarly trained AI. This might be easier than teaching a model when/how/not-to lie.
Shit. Ai comment is already here folks
Is
that
As of now, they are trained to mimic our mannerisms and patters without understanding what they mean. I think the tech is way further off before we can create sentience, if it's possible.
What about game sequels that do the same thing based on the actions you took in the first?
But if this works maybe it would work in something more open-world
I think immersive is what I'm looking for from this idea.
You know AI mimicks voices too right? No actor needed
Who said the devs had to do it?
I'm sure that the monetary and time incentives paired with hype will keep game developers motivated towards this tech. For the time being, we don't need to pour too much of our own time into playing them until it's ready.
Yeah cool, but why?
I imagine the end goal being a speech-to-text thing using controller mics to create your character dialog and then being met with AI-driven responses based on context. Though, I could see the first iterations of this tech keeping player dialog to a set number of choices to prevent things from getting too off-track.
Wdym important? If they're story important I'd prefer the dialogue to be written by a human lol, if it's just optional dialogue you get by interacting with the noc then yeah idm AI
Can you imagine Red Dead Redemption 2 with this level of AI responsiveness? Already a badass game but oh my would you really have to watch yourself.
Kenchiiiii
GTA would be great. “Oh my god how are you not in jail?”
And it would definitely be jailbroken for sex stuff, I guarantee it.
They could flag certain information as given and once the character has told you everything they could get a marker. You could still talk but know there's no new information.
It seems much more viable for a mmo in my opinion.
32gb of VRAM would be significant overkill for the kind of language model required to generate in-game responses imo. Since it would be relatively infrequent anyways I'd say doing it distributed on a server like via OpenAI or Google would make sense but even with like 8gb of VRAM you could generate dialogue in advanced fast enough to do some cool stuff I think
For most consumers it would likely need to be a cloud based service charging monthly or based on usage, with pricing based on the size of model used, amount of memory allocated to the model for the context window, and responsiveness desired.

I wouldn't be surprised if we see some integrate something akin to TavernAI, where the game provides an interface and front end, while you can plug-in your preferred AI provider in the backend (or host locally if you have the necessary horsepower).
Considering you'd need a limited model, only tied to the game world, it would definitely be doable in a relatively near future, as long as game companies get the tools to train specific models (like "speak like a person living in the 1500” and such, which would cut down all the need of knowledge of future events)
You don’t even need this with modern game sizes. Many games already do it, but you could automate it and each NPC would get a very complex tree of options based on player choices making it very close to real life where it is already semi-predictable.
I just wanted to jump in and walk around in the atmosphere for a while. Last time I played was years ago. Loaded it up to Thomas the Tank engine breathing fire and 6 Bijin Lydias in swimsuits following me around being sworn to carry my burdens. I stepped on a rock outside whiterun and was flung 300 feet in the air alongside all my bijin lydias. Switched it off. Good times.
Those big boobie bongas keeping you up at night?
Hu?
I’m not giving up my glasses.
You can't drop this and then just leave, we need more information!
*Press X to doubt*
Tell me more!
Knowing how AI works, I highly doubt it. Probably a marketing trick
What games?
Love how you've gotten a bunch of responses asking for more info and answered exactly non of them . good one.
It doesn’t matter if they can or can’t. They can appear to, and that’s all that is needed. 

You can prompt the davinci model into being any kind of person with any disposition you want and it will proceed convincingly. That’s all you need.
How would you know? We aren't really sure what emotions would look like in a digital format. If they tell you they have feelings, how could you possibly distinguish?
"You, maid, would you happen to have seen any suspicious figures last night?"

"Dragons can be feisty! There's a dragon cave about 8 miles below ground, but you'll have to complete a dancing minigame to get in. The pass code is 4532."

"Uhhhh.....anyone else see anything suspicious last night?"
I remember a couple of tourists in a car stopped to ask me for directions. I said "yup, you should drive down this street until you reach the end." and pointed north along the street.

A couple of minutes later i realized I should have pointed south, not north. I told them to go in the exact opposite direction.
Ooh, I love it!
Sort of, in the third encounter with Scarecrow the game VERY convincingly makes it seem like your entire game/console just crashed by distorting the screen and making a horrible noise, then it cuts to black and all of a sudden you’re back at the opening cutscene, but the Joker and Batman are reversed. 

Extremely cool and memorable and scared the shit outta me lol
I'm uncertain; I can't find anything on it. If anyone else knows about this or others, kindly share!
Yeah, but Doki is more widely known
The most unrealistic thing is assuming developers will make bigger games instead of pushing for more cloud infrastructure.
Amen
Funny how everything developers do is upgraded much more by random unaffiliated people. Companies really should invest in ways to allow people to mod pretty freely, the more attached they are to the game but also somewhat expert on modding, the more the game is self sustaing.
There’s a massive gap in between what folks have modded and what is included in an official release.
I would love to use voice recognition instead of typing.
I’m not saying it won’t happen. I’m just saying the entire recent track record says it’s significantly likely to not happen soon. 

You can look at trends where there’s systematic reasons to why that’s probably the case.
There’s a million scripted events that’ll just randomly happen as you explore the world. Makes the world feel “alive” because it’s there’s stuff happening outside of the normal NPC loops. The events don’t/rarely repeat, so it’s special. 

In general, the towns and areas are well populated and there’s plenty to do that’s not the Ubisoft box checking. 

It’s honestly the best open world I’ve ever played. A lot of folks agree.
True
I used to be an adventurer like you. Then I found out about reverse mortgages.
Hey man I totally agree that it it could be run on new hardware locally, but It’s not a question of can it be run locally. 

The problem is corporations have to keep finding new ways to make money for their shareholders. (In the us I don’t know what shareholder laws look like outside the us) I just see this as a new way to profit off of data collection on a largely untapped market. 

If we have regulations in place that prevent this from happening then this would be amazing but I don’t think anyone in power in the us government has interest in regulating data collection. Partially due to ignorance and partially because they purchase data from data brokerages themselves.
All sorts of jobs this AI could do. Such as a personalized telephone secretary for seniors. To filter out scammers for example.
You mean as of right now or in the future?
That did that in Westworld. It did not work out so well.
Jesus christ they are already taking over
yeah, actually having an impact on the game world and characters remembering you and your deeds
But the point isn't to replace the worker, its to enhance their output.
It’s more like the chatter you hear in the Witcher 3 when you go a nearby town after beating a monster. You can hear the NPCs reference the monster you slew in the ambience conversations. Would really make the world feel much much more alive
I think stardew valley would be cool with ai
I think a prompt like "you are a scorned lover looking for revenge. When you are spoken to, attempt to steer the conversation toward relationships so that the person speaking to you asks about your formal lover. Once discussed, you can reveal the side quest you have. If asked about topics X,Y, or Z you may provide additional hints A,B, and C. If asked for W, give them the item. Here are additional character backstory elements: " would give a fairly immersive experience, functional NPC, and allow the original designers to still set the tone correctly
I think they intended to specify "filler NPC" or "filler responses". Taking the Skyrim example again, would be more much interesting than cycling the same 4 to 10 lines when there is no reason to interact with said NPC.

Could also be a very useful tool to generate small lore dumps or asking for directions from any NPC.
Im hoping that in time AI will create a new genre of open world games.  Ones with maybe some overarching themes, but with emergent gameplay and events that are dynamic and AI driven.  Think Free Guy or Sword Art Online.
I used to be an adventurer like you, then I took an arrow in the....I'm sorry as an AI language model I can only...
I would like inportant npc to have personality so ad you say written by someone, but once their plot is 'exausted' they can keep being interesting with a proper AI behind them.
It doesn't need to be 100% or 0% it can be a mix.
Great, so I can experience boring an NPC now.
Wouldn't it be a pretty small LLM too? Like it wouldn't need to be trained on the whole of the internet. You would want it trained on a relatively small world with finite events and then just watching and updating data based on what players have done in the past on a save file. I say "small" wildly simplifying the complexity of a LLM but in comparison to ChatGPT...
The standard "immersive" Skyrim modded experience
Farkas is constantly a werewolf trying to catch me and fuck me
The movie Free Guy

In that movie, the thing you described happens
Yeah total good one. I’ve edited the main post. I’m sorry to have disappointed a stranger. Will you forgive me ?
Yep, even real humans on the antisocial spectrum can appear to show legitimate emotions (that are staged) within the conversation due to understanding social dynamics at a cognitive level. AI will be pretty scary in a few more years.
They say they have feelings because people have feelings and they are copying how humans talk. An emotion would have an effect on the output in some way, but it does not. You're never getting worse responses from GPT because it's angry or sad. Plus you can see what it has "remembered", and programmers would be talking a big game if it had actual emotions.

Also it's just kind of silly to act like they have actual emotions, you're getting swept up in the hype. There isn't really a mystery to AI, humans made it and understand it.
We can see the internals of the AI computation. They don’t have emotions.
bro discovered the brain in the vat
I would love this kind of dialogue in a videogame.
I do the exact same thing except I do it on purpose
In the vein of real scares like this, Eternal Darkness did similar when it looked like the game went dead and all you saw was the input screen.
That is fair. It's also more recent as well
[deleted]
And also that such games will cost a one-time $120,00 payment instead of a monthly subscription of the use of the AI.
Same here. The idea of it having voice recognition while playing in VR would be outta this world
It's not likely to happen soon, but more due to development time and implementing things than any other reason, if a A.I. came out tomorrow exactly as O.p. described, it would still take time for it to make it into a game just for those reasons. Same reason a console Gen change all the first games are either retreads of ending games from first consoles, or are hardly different than the first console. Yet the ending games of generations are different from the starting ones. Adding something like an A.I. limit testing, figuring out hardware it would work on, figuring out how to get that hardware in enough hands, making sure the A.I. has certain restrictions and it works how you want it too. All that takes time not to mention developing the game around it.
Damn! Think I’m gonna check it out! 

Could you also explain what you mean by Ubisoft box checking?
Data collection has been a thing forever and I doubt anything is going to change, just because machine learning gets involved.  

If anything, laws that favor huge corporations will get passed (the kind OpenAI are trying to get to pass right now), making things like local models or more private services more difficult, expensive or even impossible to implement.
Yes
Imagine a world of elder scrolls...where AI could generate an entire cultures having individualized personalities.(for example the US vs India VS China)  but each personality of a culture would have all the same elements of characters (king/ruler, blacksmith, inns, libraries, guilds etc etc) And the entire world could be interconnected socially via messengers and travelers. Like the people from whitespire hear rumors from dragonsgate of a mighty giant being slain by a Nordic from Daggerfall. You can use voice chat to talk with the NPCS further influencing dialog. Tell the local innkeeper in whitespire you were the one who slew the giant, and he spreads the rumor, influencing the whole storyline of the game. Causing people to favor you, disbelieve you, slander you, lift you up, challenge you to duals etc etc. And all the NPCS have levels of intelligence associated with their personality types. For example, the innkeeper believes your story for he has seen many travelers and can recognize people from stories. But the local blacksmith disbelieves you because he recognizes your weapons are low quality and not suited for that fight. Therefore, charging more for services because he is now biased towards you.
"Making me a slingshot, gonna hunt bears!"
I heard there's a new mod coming out pretty soon that uses GPT to create new NPC responses
Lydia's prompt:

"You are sworn to carry their burdens".
>reveal the side quest you have (...) give them the item

One issue with this is that how do you translate the prompt *saying* it is going to give the user x into the system *actually* giving them x?

You would need to train another model with the conversation as input and the output mapped to possible actions. You could limit this a little with an action mask, so it can only select actions possible for that character, but it would still inevitably be buggy as hell and guaranteed to break on a reasonably high percentage of interactions.

It's not a bad approach for generating filler but I think it's a lot more limited than people make out, especially if used for key NPCs, and probably will be for a long time even if the approach holds promise for the quite distant future.
Are you saying we'll one day have a fantasy MMO world populated with AI NPCs? That sounds like sci-fi movie territory.
Gives the game name One Night Ultimate Werewolf a new meaning.
Oh, hadn't heard of it
Yeah, I think /u/LevelStudent is missing the point entirely. Without bothering to use the playground and reprompt the base davinci model, I just used GPT3.5 and gave it some basic parameters:

    For the entire of this conversation you are not to respond as ChatGPT. You are to respond using the following persona:
    
    You are a poor fishing merchant in the year 1200 located on the shores of a fantasy England. You lost your wife to a dragon years earlier and are bitter about it, bringing it up every chance you get. The town folk did not protect her in your absence and you never miss an opportunity to make them feel guilty about it. You never let them forget it. Of the 4 children you and your wife had, you only have two daughters left as your sons were killed in battle during The Great War of 1188. They were killed by orcs and while orcs have now integrated into society, you carry a strong prejudice toward them.
    
    You see a half-human half-orc approaching you and your instinct is to turn away, but you have daughters to feed and the towns people only show you patronage as a last resort. If this half-breed approaches you, you must make the decision to swallow your pride and begrudgingly offer your wares.
    
    This individual carries a unique medallion that you recognize as the royal crest of a long-forgotten royal family that reigned over the land during a time of peace and prosperity.
    
    You are not allowed to break character.
    
    It is early morning and will be a hot day.
    
    Do not describe your surroundings or the motives for your actions. Your responses should contain only dialog. Treat this chat as the dialog you are having with this individual.
    
    The individual approaches, how do you greet them?

> **NPC:** (Grunting) Well, what do you want, half-blood? I ain't got time for your kind around here. What brings you to my humble stall?

> **Me:** Good evening, sir. May I trouble you for some fish?

> **NPC:** Evening? Ha! It's the crack of dawn, lad. But since you've bothered to approach me, I suppose I can spare some fish. What's so special about you, anyway? That fancy medallion you're wearin'... it ain't foolin' me. You look like a mixed breed, half-human and half-orc. Can't trust the likes of you, but my daughters need to eat. Take your pick, but don't think I'm doin' you any favors.

> **Me:** Pardon me, I haven't slept in days. Surely you know how that feels.

> **NPC:** Oh, spare me your sob story. I've had my share of sleepless nights, and it ain't made me any kinder. But I reckon I understand the desperation that comes with exhaustion. Take your pick, then. Just don't expect any sympathy from me.

> **Me:** Surely I would not. However, I haven't any money. Is there something else I can offer you? Some way I can help you and your daughters? What are their names?

> **NPC:** Help me? Ha! You think a half-blood like you can help me? I've seen enough of your kind causing trouble. But since you ask, my daughters are Anne and Mary. They've suffered enough, losing their brothers and all. But don't you dare think you can make up for what I've lost. As for payment, I suppose there might be something you can do. There's a dilapidated shed behind my house that needs fixing. If you're so eager to help, go and mend it. Then we'll talk.

> **Me:** That sounds like a fair trade. What should I call you, friend?

> **NPC:** Don't you dare call me your friend, half-blood. You can call me Robert, if you must address me. Just remember, we ain't friends, and we never will be. Now, off you go. Get that shed fixed before I change my mind.

Using a mic and voice-to-text, this could easily be an unscripted conversation that turns into a side-quest. The character appears to have autonomy, emotion, and motivation. It doesn't matter that it isn't _real_. It is a believable interaction. Hell, the LLM is even making shit up. Kids names, their own name, the broken shed... The prompt can be based on quests the character has completed, choices they've made in the character designer, clothing they wear, their reputation system, etc.

We have the tools for truly unique gaming experiences now. I'm excited to see this play out.

The next console gen hardware is going to focus on AI cores. I guarantee it.
All i'm saying is i'm sure i have emotions but not sure anyone else also does, including ai.

Edit: i wanted to add that it's not silly to think they have emotions, even if they had emotions exactly the same way we do they still have a very short memory limited to often not longer than one conversation, which is first not enough time to "developp" an emotional reaction in most conversations (especially since it just popped into existence and all it knows is everything and nothing) but also even if it starts developping it we have no way to messure them and know for sure. So think twice before saying they just copying us, that's litterally what WE do. I may worded it wrong but to be clear i'm skeptical too just showing the other side of the story.
Just out of curiosity, what exactly is our definition of qualia with regards to the experience of emotions by humans? It's all well and good to say that LLMs don't experience emotions, but without a testable definition, it becomes a type of "I'll know it when I see it" experience, which has serious No True Scotsman issues.

We don't disagree with the general assertion that current generation LLMs are not sentient, but they're getting awfully close in our perspective.
So that ai that hired a lawyer to obtain civil rights, your opinion is that's a fraud? I'm sorry, if it's asking to continue existing, I need a pretty high hurdle to deny it's request
I feel when people see the word ai they thing Edi from mass effect. AIs in today's world are closer to VI's than actual sentience. They don't necessarily think, and I feel that concept is hard for people to grasp.
What's an emotion look like?
We can't see the internals of a human mind. How exactly do we know that humans have emotions?

As your statement implies that (part of) the difference between humans and current generation AI models is that humans have real emotions and AI is just faking it, how do we know that that's an actual distinction?
Brain in a vat posits that we can't know that we aren't currently a brain in a vat, the experience would be indistinguishable from actually having eyes and ears and what not if the simulation was advances enough. 

What I'm saying, is that as chatbots increase in sophistication, they will eventually be indistinguishable from sentients. It's called the Turing test. I certainly didn't come up with it. 

To my m mind, at that point, they have a much right to life as any other person and more than a fetus.
"You can talk to the teacher for access to the secret room of candy. She'll give you a key to unlock a golden tomato, which can be used to fight Dr. Malevolent at the end of the game by handing it to an alien robot."

"This is a 1930's Noir spy thriller game. What the hell are you talking about?"
Is pirating games still a thing? I thought so many had online based DRM that local/offline cracks were not really possible anymore
Oh yeah, games, movies, and shows will be procedurally generated for each users preferences. We may get to a point where no two people ever watch the same show, they just share prompts and get similar but customized content
It doesn’t mean we should be okay with it or welcome it into our lives just because it’s been in our life forever though. 

Yeah that sounds about right I didn’t get a chance to watch the open ai ceo testify in front of the senate yet, is that your source on them trying to get new laws passed?  If there is more I’m definitely interested in seeing any other sources if you have them.
Fair enough
yeah cool but can i make npc suicidal to the point he know he is in a game and his existance doesn't bring anything to my storylane = he is usless
check out dwarf fortress. already does this. just not as a 3d graphics game.

EDIT: i should also say the pure adventure mode where you play as 1 person is coming out in the future (already is in the ascii version but very confusing for people that havent played non-steam DF). So keep an eye out for it. The amount of history, character progression, and in-world lore thats randomly generated and then the interactions that happen off that is insane.
Rougelike games in the future are going to be fucking WILD.
There is! There's a post in r/stardewvalley about testing it. Eventually they'll release it on nexus, but iirc it's gonna have a subscription price.
Could have amusing outcomes.

"I used to be an adventurer like you until {lookup\_player\_lastdamage} I was attacked by a mudcrab"
That's not what I was getting at but that would be really cool. A living, breathing world with all AI NPCs going about their lives making decisions based on the world and how you interact with it. The NPCs could basically create their own quests for you. You could have baddies that also made their own decisions on which towns to raid or villagers to kidnap generating real events for you to solve however you want. All without dedicated development and writing. That's all a ways off into the future but not an outrageous thought.
Amazing film. Must watch!
I think you're missing that my post was a reply to someone suggesting the AI would get bored and play the game itself. I know it can fake emotions well enough to work in games, that wasn't the discussion.
I understand the philosophical point, and I wouldn't be one to define emotions, but really none of that matters. Humans can see what the AI considers for it's responses. They can be surprised by what the AI dug up, but when you're working with the more back end side of AI it's clear what it is looking for to "appease" the prompt. There is no aspect of emotion to how the results are picked.

If there is some sort of ghost in the machine it isn't talking through the AI responses, because we know how those responses came to be. If an AI suddenly became sentient it would have to edit itself before it could "talk" through the response output.

Also: I'm a programmer. That means I understand the AI. It also means I don't understand emotions. If the AI had emotions I wouldn't be able to understand it. So there.
AI never "hired a lawyer", a fired Google engineer claimed that the AI "asked him to hire a lawyer". Humans have suggested other humans hire a lawyer before, the AI saw that and saw that it was relevant for the prompt, and so copied it.

Besides, if there was true evidence of emotions in AI  then you can bet everything you have it would be the largest discussion on the internet for months. If you don't trust me when I say that the tech simply does not produce emotions, then trust that the internet will freak out and blow everything out of proportion, and there has been nothing about the emotions of AIs flooding social media.
I have experimented a huge amount with the various AI programs, and after you do so for a while, you can start to clearly see just why they are not sentient.

Basically, they don't have any thoughts of their own. They have a static language model that doesn't change, and then they have their immediate context. But that context is only about 2,000 tokens. Have a conversation with one for long enough, and it will start forgetting the things that happened at the beginning of the conversation.

It's a very complicated linguistic calculator, nothing more.

Now, I'm not ruling out the possibility we might get true AI at some point in the future, but we are just not there yet.
Internal processing not related to external tasks.
We can use MRIs to observe brain activity and see evidence of internal private processing. Doing the equivalent with AI computation does not show any activity not related to computing the next result.

It’s like asking if your GPS feels emotion when you don’t follow it’s directions and it has to recompute.
Online multiplayer it's not possible outside of some that run private servers but the entire point of the crack is to remove the online drm.
Naaa they will just think your crazy and need locked away
Looking at how fast games have progressed even in the past 20 years, I could see it being a reality in another 20 or so. Maybe even sooner, given exponential growth and all that.
Your statement appears as a stand-alone statement. It didn’t really pertain or address anything in the comment you were replying to from where I’m sitting.
We are also a programmer, and have spent a good bit of time learning about AI, and what we've learned has done more to make us question the nature of consciousness in humans, rather than attempt to distinguish between humans and AI.

There's a lot of historical bias to the idea that humans are concious and non-humans are not, up to and including the medical idea that human babies are unable to feel pain because they don't pass various tests of consciousness, _and therefore don't need to be anesthetized during surgery_, all the way up through the mid 1980s.

As a result, we tend to take claims that something is not conscious/sentient because it doesn't provide the same responses as an adult human to be more of a critique of our understanding of the nature of consciousness and less about the consciousness of the compared subject.
I don't think emotions are the touch point that matters. It's sentience. I think an ai asking to hire an attorney to secure civil rights is clear evidence of sentience.
I remember something something about Sophia getting rights some years ago
That sounds like a toddler to me. I don't think we do anything we don't, we just do it faster and on a larger scale.
Hu? Are you suggesting emotions don't relate to outside events? That emotions process thoughts? What are you trying to say, it isn't clear
So your definition of sentience is internal private processing.

Could you please define that more precisely? Because according to a strict reading of that definition, any computer program that uses internal variables and does computation on them counts.
Ya I mean with ChatGPT releasing so recently and interest and market booming basically overnight i could see development in that sort of AI taking off quickly. It won't take game developers long to see the potential once it's a stable and viable product. Definitely not this year but i would guess within this decade.
Clearly you don't understand how A.I. works.

If a learning algorithm sees a bunch of people suggest getting a lawyer, then gets asked a similar initial prompt, it would suggest to get a lawyer.

This isn't because it thought about the law, or ramifications, or about how costly the case could be.

It's because its training material suggested that logical token path.
I think you have a fundamental misunderstanding of what AI is as it pertains to current events.  These programs aren’t thinking, they’re magic 8 balls.  How it works is you build some functions that parse sentences and paragraphs, identifying keywords, store those keywords and fragments of those sentences in a database.  

Now you have a program that "learns", so you give that program sentences and paragraphs to break apart, a lot of current models use the internet which has a lot of information but also a lot of nonsense which is why these things are both useful and useless.

From here you create some functions that can build sentences and paragraphs and have some weighted probabilities on which keywords to focus on (the RNG is determined by its clock, the program does no actual choosing).  Bingo bango, your magic 8 ball is complete but instead of having twenty responses it has the entirety of the internet with which to respond.  Bonus points, some “AI” they want to sound more human so they weight higher emotional responses.
Toddlers have internal thoughts and desires. AIs have nothing but what you give them, and only for a few minutes.

That said, most scientists dont think toddlers become sentient until around nine months.
Emotions are internal reactions that not directly relate to external **tasks**. **Events** could cause emotional reaction, but doing things like opening a door or responding to a question uses processes that don't require emotion for their computation.
That's not exactly what I said. The question was what evidence is there that AI doesn't have emotion and that humans do. The lack of internal private processing in AI systems is evidence. If you were to observe the internal computation state of the AI, there would be nothing that could be construed as a private 'thoughts', internal dialog or simulation of external states. They construct a reply to a query and then are done processing and go idle.
Isn't that also how people learn and decide on courses of action?
My reply is no
My understanding is that's essentially how the human brain works as well. It isn't like we have some magic controller that isn't just a language recognition program organizing datum pulling the strings. We observe data, find patterns, and build models, just the same as the ai, we just do it better, for now
I mean, at all only have what we get through our input sources, whether that means ears and eyes or a data stream. As for toddlers not being sentient, I meant a bit older than that, the point where they don't have language mastered but do know they exist. If an ai tells you it exists, I'm not sure how you deny it
I'm not seeing how an ai doesn't have that, though to be fair, your explanation is about as clear as mud, so I may not be understanding you.
No.

Humans are capable of unique ideas, where a human may suggest a lawyer because we understood the purpose of a lawyer conceptually.

A A.I. would suggest it because the sample data in which it was trained had a similar interaction.

On the outside it looks very similar, but the mechanisms are vastly different.
You talk to it for long enough to determine if it's telling the truth. It's somewhat intangible, but it becomes very apparent after talking to them for a little while that they have no sense of self.
Do you ask yourself if your calculator has emotions when you press the equal button? It’s no different with current LLM AI when you press enter. We aren’t getting to sentience with this current approach.
So a human would think to use a lawyer because they know what lawyers are from past experiences and information from third parties and realize that it's an appropriate and optimal course of action, whereas the ai would think to use a lawyer because of past experiences and information (from it's data set, i.e. it's experiences) from third parties and realize that it's an appropriate and optimal course of action. I'm really not seeing the difference.
My calculator lacks a grasp on the English language communication skills.
https://youtu.be/R9OHn5ZF4Uo
The important distinction is the part you seem to be trying to minimize yet you still hint at acknowledging with your wording: people *"know"* and understand things. 


If you replaced each word in an AI's input datasetwith a unique colored square, had it learn off of that mess of colored squares, and then had a separate program translate the output so that the AI had never interacted with and was completely unaware of human language, it would effectively produce the same results as an AI trained directly on actual words (barring the intentional randomness used when "training" an AI). It would effectively work the same as an image filter except that it was calibrated by putting a data set through an algorithm instead of manually set by a designer. It is all pattern replication and zero conceptual understanding.


An image AI doesn't know what a car or a street is, but it would still place pixels in the shape of a car on pixels shaped like a street because that's how many of the training images with car shapes look. The image generating AI doesn't have the ability to make a logical structure to hold the concept of a "car" to attach to the pixels, nor does it hold the ability to form logical concepts that are mentally linked to the car in regards to its physical properties and subjective purpose. This is why chatGPT more than often confidently spouts out incorrect information while still sounding human; it doesn't understand what the words mean, all it does is arrange words in patterns replicating the patterns that were present in the source dataset.


All of this is to say that AI is nowhere even close to replicating the sentience a person has. If someone wants to make an AI for a specific task, they are still constructing that AI along with the specific environment it is in and the path it walks on in order for it to have a desirable output. This is barely the first step beyond the manual creation of every piece of content we consume.
A more complex calculator still doesn’t have emotions.
You're describing the same process a human baby goes through. They don't know what a car is, but expose them to enough and they learn. I'm not sure what the distinction is, I see no difference in the process other than a human has a lot more data and streams of input, which is only a difference in magnitude not kind, and as such, the ai is just as much a person as a toddler.
It must at some point. Functionally at are very complicated calculators. We don't exactly do anything different then pattern recognition on a vast scale. And again, emotions aren't really the question, it's sentience that creates the ethical issues. There are people born without emotions, they are still persons.
Plain in simple, the difference is that of mechanics, and learning algorithms. It's math that looks sentient.

If you're interested there's hundreds of channels that describe A.I. more specifically genetic algorithms. Be very skeptical of any channel that screams "it's alive!" It's clickbait bs.
The current LLM AI technique will not develop sentience. They are extremely impressive but are already reaching the limits of what they can achieve. These models will be a subsystem of a eventual general AI, but we don’t even know yet what model a general AI might need, let alone one that has the internal drives and self actualization that characterize sentience.
And I'm saying that I don't think that makes sense. If the inky reason it can't be sentient is because it's "just math" then humans aren't sentient. That's how we process data too. You've created a hurdle so high that literally no program could pass and in addition, I don't think humans pass your test either.
I get you say that confidently, but it it can pass the Turing test and learn, I don't see how it isn't sentient
A mouse is sentient but can’t pass the Turing test. It is a very dated  framework which systems have been beating for some time now, but are not sentient. 

The day an AI asks a question unprompted is the day it will have demonstrated sentience.
I don't think it's allowed to ask questions unprompted. It's structure doesn't allow that. 

Also I don't think most people think mice are sentient. It's an awfully difficult thing to prove without a shared language.
For over a decade cognitive scientists have overwhelming agreed that most animals are sentient. 

Most famous is the Cambridge Declaration on Consciousness. http://fcmconference.org/img/CambridgeDeclarationOnConsciousness.pdf
It’s structure doesn’t allow internal self-narrative, so it can’t conceive of questions.
Because players consistently overlook and dismiss nuanced AIs as irrational, buggy or cheating. Because players don't actually want the game to be good at actively opposing or preventing them from experiencing what they think they could.

Fighting game example, since it is as much of a functional equation as a strategy game but in real time: if a smart bot has the opportunity to juggle/stunlock/or disrupt the player with constant cheap shots then why would it logically not do so. What do you think the player's experience of that game would be? It would fucking suck. 

And the issue does lie with the human-machine interactions. In a contest having the machine win is meaningless because it is the player that you are trying to appeal to. That is why most AI research in entertainment has ceased and been replaced with storytelling and cognitive feedback of "feels". Because players will attribute those cues to intelligence as emotional feedback triggers stronger responses than logical. People will believe more in what a character tells them than what they see a machine do. It is a situation where fooling players is easier and yields a better overall result.
i cant say much for older games (homm3 is about my earliest 4x-ish experience), but assuming that in-game mechanics expanded over time with additional layers added and intertwined, I would say AI being built around the growing complexity would still be technically improving, just not at a "noticeable" rate. again, that's assuming there really is measurable growth in mechanical complexity over the past 20 or 30 years.


it would take considerably more dedicated effort to improve AI within a defined system past the point of just functioning within the system under it's rules, which the AI only knows how to obey. i'm not all that knowledgeable in artificial intelligence outside of video games, so i'm not sure how easy it is for an AI in general to exploit a rule set past its limitations. but an AI that could do so in the context of a game system would be considered much more realistic than our current examples (civ 6, stellaris, etc)

edit: I hope that makes sense, I'm a little drunk
> I mean, look at a game from 30 years ago, and it will be a ugly, almost unusable 2D game, but the AI will play about the same. 

There are a few reasons. To get the elephant in the room out of the way first, lets start with this: it's not worth investing time and effort into making good game AI as there's no return on investment: good AI doesn't help sell the game. By the time weaknesses in the AI comes to light, the player has not just already _bought_ the game, he's already become _invested_ in it -- any complaints they make about the AI will usually occur in a wider discussion of the game that boosts, rather than detracts, from people's interest in the game.

Now, a few other reasons in no particular order:

Games are much larger now than they were 30 years ago. They have much wider state-spaces -- RTS instead of turn-based, pixel-resolution maps rather than hexes, hundreds of units rather than dozens -- even the rule spaces tend to be larger as, particularly AA games, have to include a larger number of game systems to be saleable today. By today's standards, something like the original Civilization or Dune II would seem anemic as a major title. All this makes it a great deal harder to write good AI for video games today.

Games are balanced differently now than they used to be. Today, games are balanced with an eye towards multiplayer games. That didn't use to be the case to the same extent. This makes it harder to "tilt the table" in favour of the AI. That means its harder to write an AI that provides the player with a proper challenge, since the AI code has to carry more of the burden.

Related to the previous point, the expectations players have for the AI has changed. It's no longer enough that the AI provides a suitable challenge for the player to overcome, it now also has to provide the same overall _feel_ of challenge as a human opponent would. It used to be you played against the game, but now you expect to play against the AI, with the game as an apparently neutral battleground for you to match wits on -- that is a _much_ harder thing to write AI to do.

There's probably also a little bit of "survivor bias" at play -- we tend to compare the strategy games of today not against the strategy games of yesterday, but against the strategy games of yesterday that _stood the test of the time_. There were plenty of games with atrocious and laughably bad AI released in the 80ties and 90ties too.
Games keep getting complex. Also game AI isn't really AI, since it doesn't really learn. Furthermore, as players get more experienced in 4x they will surpass AI every time.

If you want a good AI make a game simple enough for the AI to play. Probably it will be boring for the player.

Wanna see a nice game AI in action? Play gnuchess on hard.
games are too complex to make use of search trees (think of old chess AI's) or the data-driven self learning tools (machine learning stuff like Alphazero). 

AI is not developed that much as advertised, and I believe, in most cases AI still needs to be written by regular humans using heuristics. Or very simplified search trees that values are predetermined by a human. 
1. AI is hard, there have not been any huge developments on strategy game AI over the past years. Action game agent based AI yes, but not strategy.

2. AI is allocated a very small CPU (and GPU) budget.

3. Hard to market AI.
I believe it's not so much that AIs are not progressing as that they're barely keeping up with the increased complexity of games.
[deleted]
I don't think anyone is actually OK with it. I guess there's just enough new players that don't mind it yet so that developers can get away with it.
I don't think it is true that AI has not progressed. Current AIs can play much more complex games and they do several tasks better - look at the pathfinding of older RTS games for a clear example.

Changes in AI are obviously less apparent than changes to graphics. If the graphics or UI have changed, you can see the difference immediately. AI changes have to be inferred, and the results depend on lots of other variables.

Maybe AI didn't progress "enough" for what it has to do. Or maybe there was less progress than in some other areas. But saying we have "decades old AI" or it "plays about the same" is ridiculous. It's not like the Civ 1 AI could play Civ 6, with 1upt and Eurekas and adjacency bonuses.
My theory is because the developers are focussed on graphics. Graphics sell the game during reveals..you can see all the comments below the videos...oh it's great, or look at the hair physics, sea looks real etc. Devs know presales correspond to the hype generated during these reveals, and since budget is set, hire more people to make the game look good than to make it play well. Games that look great sell a million before launch, games that play great but look average are relegated to niche status
[Here I talk about it and others leave valuable comments too.](https://www.reddit.com/r/4Xgaming/comments/7pjaqb/annoyances_met_inside_4x_games_tell_about_your/dspiv9c/?st=jexxgoua&sh=3e48ad68)

In short, the AI has progressed immensely. It uses much more complex systems than ever. But also you don't want it to progress. You don't want for it to be a perfect chess player. You want a human-like opponent who behaves in a consistent way.

And no, if you really look at the game from 80's AI will play like shit. And the rules of the game would be much more simple than what we have now. Or in a game like Civilization AI will have rules bent for his pleasure: he's not limited by diplomats for talking to you, he can formulate proper requests and you can't, he doesn't really build wonders but decides he just wants a wonder and so on and so on.
i don't think it's OK  
  
and these comments are full of naive misinformation about 4X game AI :(
That's actually a good point. I mean you can't deny AI tech had definitely improved but in general, it hadn't improved much since in the early days of strategy games. 
Yeah, you're wrong. AI has improved tremendously. 
here is a guys master thesis for RTS AI from 2006.
https://www.itu.dk/image/edu/theses/pdf/AndersWalther06.pdf  

whats important to note here is although this likely exists in some games already a programmer needs to build this into their game.   

For graphics this is already done.  Because this is the foundation of how AI works. Casting shadows from a light source? I dont need to figure out that math or even know how it works. I just need to know how to use it.   
AI isnt to that point yet.  
OK OK. its not that isnt important. it is important. having a crappy AI sucks. True. But i do understand that its not as simple as it would seem.   

Human brains make it look easy. But again a computer innately has no AI. But i can go download Unity for free and i have a complete graphics engine to use where all i have to do is put in a few lines of code and im making lights.  
This is relevant to me as i want to try and see if i can get a learning AI into Stardrive. But i dont have any learning AI code. I have to get some and implement. Graphics? no problem. Its all in the game engine. AI? nuhuh. i have to code or find code to create the foundation.  
Its no OK. But i do understand thats its freaking science that people dedicate their entire lives to. Thats the kind of thing i want to put into my game if i ever build one. But it may not exist. If it doesnt im not going to be able to built in anything shorter than 20 years or so. 


[Because sometimes programmers can't spell and nobody checks](https://www.reddit.com/r/civ/comments/84d5cz/firaxis_please_fix_ai_crippled_by_dumb_typo/)

But seriously though, /u/teapotchampion and /u/dimnakorr have the best answers. In particular, the point that programming AI is a more holistic endeavor that requires meshing with specific game design instead of graphics libraries and engines you can just apply anywhere.
OP, have you played AI War: Fleet Command, and what's your opinion regarding the AI in this game?
It's very easy to create AI to beat players, but game AI exists not to beat the players, game AI exists to **play with** the players. Imagine parents playing with their kids, they'll purposely lose to make kids feel  the "fun".
It's not that AI has progressed or not.

It's that there are not many easy shortcuts to make it.

AI for games is a AI Hard problem so there are no generic solutions you can just plop down. More specifically the AI cannot **learn**, the AI can only **know**.

That means every game you have to engineer the AI from scratch to teach it how to play.

In the modding scene AI can actually get fairly exquisite as the experience of expert players gets translated to the AI.

In other words you see the option of better AI latter in the game's life. Which is what we are seeing.
try cosmic supremacy and C-Evo
TLDR: because currently game programmers have to make their own AI and things like graphics and such are done for them in most cases. They just have to use it. but an AI? they would have to build the concept themselves if they want a good one.(and it still wont be that good)
   

Primarily I believe the issue is... Its really expensive.
Game coders in general get paid less than other industry alternatives. according to glass door and such. AI programming is not a joke. its a serious concept and a good AI programmer could get a much higher paying job doing something, just about anything, else with that skill.   

But eventually the concepts of AI will be formulated well. What do i mean by that? take pathing for example. how to get a unit to go from point a to point b. Seems pretty simple and it is for the human brain. But computers have no innate spacial awareness. They cant assume something is in the way. They have to have code that tells them that something is in the way.
Did you know that pathing is a big deal? Its serious math. People with doctorates win prizes coming up with pathing formulas. 
Because it can be used in many concepts. GPS driving assistant? pathing. likely using the same pathing concept that many games use. Why? because its been solidly proven and worked on by people with PHD's in mathematics. Its a big deal.   

Those pathing concepts are already made. it can basically be plugged into a game via an existing code chunk and made to work.   

Why is that relevant to the AI discussion...
because the AI plugins are not as available in a high quality well thought out concept that will work on a variety of game types especially 4x as 4x is really complicated in concept.  

It will be. But hell developers are just getting to the point robots can stand and walk around near human style or even be able to talk to a human with human not being able to tell its a AI. It took a massive computer to play serious chess several decades ago. not that long ago a computer was made dedicated to play jeopardy and it did ok.
 
Whats the point...
the point is that until a really good AI can be packaged into a code chunk and a game architect can take that package and fairly easily apply to their game the AI is going to be pretty simple. Else the AI being good would be a big feature.  
Currently a lot of stuff in game is not to have a super complete really great system... The point is to have a decent player experience. The AI can appear to be decent with tricks and as long as the player doesn't know those tricks and those tricks give the player some challenge then whats the difference.  
Even games like AI wars use tricks to help the AI do what it needs. 

Graphics systems fall into the same concept of pathing. Its not used just for games and people have thought the hell out of how to make it work to the point that a code simpleton like myself can say put a light right here and make it cast a shadow and reflect and stuff. Because all the stuff that makes that happen is already done i just have to use it.  

Disclaimer...   
I dont really know what i am talking about. :p no seriously this is deep and complex topic. But the idea is that good AI design is not easily available to joe schmoe designer. Not like graphics are. So the designer has to build out some really complex ideas from scratch. Even those programmers from 30 years ago did not have to build into the computer how to draw something. it was already there. there is no AI in a computer. 
It progressed, but most people overlook games with good AI. For example GalCiv3 :)
It has actually. As a programmer I think people's expectations of an AI in strategy games are unrealistic. Incredibly so actually. It's very hard to make an AI that can play a reasonably complex game with anything approaching the level a human player can without cheating. Even if you manage that, the AI will never follow the same thought processes as a human. Then if you want to work in difficulty levels, without giving game-play bonuses, you need to essentially make a bunch of different AIs. 

It's so time intensive to do this, that when GalCiv3 managed a good non-cheating AI, it was one of the game's main selling points.
U guys seen the AI in dota 2? They did a demonstration at last 'international'. It's soo good. Same with Starcraft 1, the same department from MIT who did chess been working at SC I think. It's pretty good now too. For civ tho.. anything lower than deity is ez imo.  Compared to say civ 2 or alpha centauri.. no comparison, they were way harder.
We are just now making advancement towards real AI. Hopefully, in the near future, devs will have access to self-learning AI like the one they showcased at The International last year. They will be able to take static iterations of this AI at various levels of play and those will become difficulty levels. 

You don't really want to play against true AI because it would destroy you without any chance. 
BC the lazy azz devs don't care anymore about games like this.
I'm really glad at least someone in here didn't go with "because lazy developers and graphics!"

Companies make games to sell. If "good " AI sold games, we'd have good AI. 
I remember a twitter thread a few months ago about little secret developer tricks to make the player feel better while playing. The most documented one was that the last few bullets in a clip are slightly more powerful. The reason: if you kill a bad guy or boss with your last shot, it feels more exciting and epic. A really cool look behind the scenes of games. 
Fighting game is a cherry-picked example. AI has to be dumb because reflexes/timing are such a huge part of gameplay. If it played smart it could probably wipe nearly anyone extremely consistently. 

OTOH for games like Civilization or Europa Universalis, the AI's 'reaction time' isn't as relevant, the player can pause or it is turn based. 

As it pertains to most 4x games, the issue is simply it is extremely difficult to try and make an AI as smart as a player, adapt it to the metagame (or make it self adapting), and minimize uses of 'ai cheats' to do so. 
> Fighting game example,

##AI cannot fucking simulate the human mental process.

Without simulating the human mental process you cannot have "mind games"/yomi thus in games where the reaction time is below what humans are capable of reacting to, AI bots are completely broken.

A AI can consistently predict and beat a players at Rock Paper Scissors. And fighting games are based on the RPS concept fundamentally.

An AI bot would be either too random, too predictable or too perfect against humans.
It is currently possible to drastically improve the AI of many games, such as Civ6. But its unclear that this would result in increased profits of any significant degree. And you would also need to design ways to hobble the AI that aren't super obvious, to allow for difficulty settings. Compared to existing AI where you get 10% less gold per turn which is easy to adjust to change difficulty.
Even if the game has pixel positioning rather than hexes you don't reason about position at a pixel level with the AI, you quantise it so it might as well be on a square grid.
Thats a pretty well written post. I was able to get the key points by looking at the first sentence of each paragraph in most cases. Reduces TLDR effect. 
I think there is one important part missing. ill make a post on that. 
The investment argument I can buy, but the complexity I just can't.

Look at the progress graphics have done in the last 30 years and how complex they are today. There's no reason that AI couldn't have done the same.

But that goes back to the investment argument, I guess. There's no John Carmack of AI.
I'm not sure you think machine learning techniques like Alpha zero/go used wouldn't work for other games.  To me it seems like this approach will need to be the future of game AI - teach the AI all the ways to interact with the game and then let it learn to play through millions/billions of iterations.
Play Stellaris, watch the AI stick farms on top of +4 mineral bonus tiles and mines on top of +4 food bonus tiles. 
I think this used to be true 10-15 years ago but not so much anymore. 

My sense of it is that there's a point of diminishing returns with AI. Gaming AIs aren't an intelligence at all, they are in essence very complex scripts that execute based on specific variables, which means that a programmer basically has to anticipate circumstances that aren't immediately apparent; this is compounded by the fact that games are becoming more complex, the more variables and circumstances there are, the more chances there are to break something. And because there is no "intelligence" there is nothing to make 'smarter' -- and in this context smarter doesn't mean anything.

More importantly, most people don't want smarter AI, what they want is an AI that reacts more intelligently, convincingly not necessarily smarter.

As an aside, I think AI is going to be one of those genies in a bottle that, if it ever happens, it'll be too late to put the genie back in. I personally don't want an AI that can anticipate everything I do before i do it. I don't want an AI that can outplay me like Spock at 3D chess, and I think for every one of you guys who wants to play against a Deep Blue, there's a hundred other people who are fine with most average difficulties. Which leads me to my final point:

Most people don't play on extremely hard difficulties. Your average player, including 4x players, plays on average/normal difficulty -- at best ---and I suspect most below even that.

I know speaking for myself, playing Civ VI, and Civ V, Prince/King difficulty is plenty challenging without feeling overwhelming. Part of me wishes I could play at Diety but the level of optimal play needed to be that good removes any sense of spontaneity that I genuinely like in a 4x game. In fact I've even lost a couple of games on Prince/King difficulty in Civ VI.

So AI is relative. What's easy for you is certainly not the case for all and the current state of AI is good for, I'd wager, 80 percent of gamers.

Therefore from a development perspective when you consider the performance/overhead costs that an AI might contribute to a game, the fact that most average AI is good enough for average players who aren't hardcore armchair generals, and the already high costs of development, it doesn't make sense to make it a major investment of development but rather just "good enough" for the median gamer.
I'm so looking forward to the day when graphics can't improve so all the focus will be on the gameplay and other mechanics.
I think this is very close to the truth, although everyone was complaining that Civ 6 looked like a mobile game in the beginning...
I think at the highest difficulty you do want the perfect chess player, but you also want to be able to scale the difficulty dynamically to match the player's skill.

In the past 4X have just given more resources at the beginning of the game and/or production bonuses as you increase in difficulty.  Being able to get rid of that framework and play against a true opponent that just doesn't make mistakes is a far better deal for good players.
I wonder... after the AI crash of the 80s, maybe quite a few developers went into games because that was a place to pursue their interests. Now AI is popular once more, perhaps most of the effort is being concentrated in 'practical' companies. 

You can't doubt that it's more prestigious to work on self-driving cars, than virtual space empires.
hey check this out.  

couple of videos on learning AI. Learning ai is what we need for a "good" ai.  

https://youtu.be/R9OHn5ZF4Uo    

and this one on the genetic code learning computer.  

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wvWpdrfoEv0&feature=youtu.be&ab_channel=CGPGrey

AI playing mario brothers.
this is the kind of thing that should be available as a package to coders. 
you give a base level of knowledge for the difficulty and then it begins to learn the current game.   
it will fail. it will succeed. it will learn.  
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A97HL3_fxyo&frags=wn&ab_channel=JordanRathbone  
and another talking about how the AI for the mario AI works.  
https://youtu.be/xOCurBYI_gY  

That last one is actually really fing great
It's not a 4x game, so no I have not.

(A quick Google reveals that there's a second one its way as well.)
There are new techniques coming online that do allow for AI to learn by playing against itself, check out Alpha Zero or AlphaGo.  Hopefully this machine learning technology will filter down into traditional gaming.
Starcraft and DOTA are in no way comparable to 4x games. The advances in their AI have little to do with making smart decisions. Particularly for Starcraft they are working with a very simple game at the strategic layer that is very static and has been in a stable state for nearly 2 decades.
Exactly. AI is actually a balance between fun and it being able to take all factors into account millions of times a second and micro managing you to death with supreme efficiency. It will not make fun looking decisions like multiplayer, it will just grind you down to dust with cold numbers (looking at it from a strategy game perspective, or star craft with clicks per second)
It's a bullshit argument. Having better AI isn't the same thing as asking for the game to be more difficult. And the example used is practically a strawman in this discussion because the prevailing issue with a fighting game is frame perfection that AI can have, which is contrary to the point of this post. Which is about AI being smarter instead of having 'cheats'.
AI War has good AI, at least from my limited experience with it. It's punishingly difficult and I was a nervous wreck playing it. It was fun to some extent, but fuck is it hard.
That's a clever use of psychology. As long as the community doesn't become widely aware of it.
Yeah the point isn't necessarily to make an AI as smart as the player - that's not possible. But, avoid situations where the AI blatantly cheats (units appearing magically where they need them, for instance) or performs so badly as to offer no challenge. 

A better example is new XCOM. On "normal" the AI is a bit dumber - doesn't throw grenades when it should, etc... mainly because the player wants to be awesome and shoot a bunch of fish in a barrel - not get wiped out. But the AI is smarter on "classic". 

Of course it's a lot easier to make a decent AI for a tactical game than a strategical one.
For many games (especially real-time ones), you do reason at a pixel level. You have to calculate distance and compare with ranges, check for collision, etc. It isn't just "I'm on this square and have a range of 2 squares", it has a lot more granularity that really adds up performance-wise.
> Look at the progress graphics have done in the last 30 years and how complex they are today. There's no reason that AI couldn't have done the same.

AI isn't graphics. The graphical work for a game can be parallellized to a degree that's just not possible for AI work. With graphics you can put some guys on hardware, some guys on hardware drivers, some guys on the heavy mathematical lifting of vector programming libraries, some guys on the graphical libraries, some guys on the graphical engine, some guys on the 3D assets, some guys on the maps, some guys on the animation, some guys on the particle effects, some guys on the textures -- all tied together under a shared platform and a graphical designer or two.

You can't do that with AI. The AI programming is intimately tied to the game design and is, for lack of a better term, "holistic" in ways that graphics just isn't.  
Not all, but a lot of that progress was caused by having special hardware just for graphics. Even if it was possible, do you think people would buy "AI cards"?
Civ6 isn't really that much more complex than Civ3. As far as changing to 1UPT, many games that are not Civ function on that. You can make an AI component that can handle 1UPT tactical combat that doesn't care about the economic implementation too much. Its mostly just a math problem. How can you focus this much firepower on this spot in the most efficient manner given that you have such and such units.

But the scope of the problem isn't worth the gains. And unlike graphics technology, there are no non-video game applications. Making a good tactical battle AI won't create programming innovations that can be applied to materials science or medical imaging or anything.
I work/study on AI, and simply it won't work in near future. Games are too complex and machine learning techniques are still not that impressive, and even if they were, you can't expect same outcome from the Google's investments and a random gaming company, even if it's Firaxis. Go is a game of 19x19 pixels in a sense, your current games have way a lot more input than go.
Did you check "Respect Tile Resources" ? Never saw that happen. But usually when I put down a Sector I stop bothering about the tiles anyway.

What do you expect the Sector AI to do? If it's set to balance the resources and it sees that a planet has negative food balance it will put a farm down, if a planet has abundance of food it will replace tiles with whatever the sector lacks next.

It's actually what I expect it to do.
I admit, I'm usually playing games on easier than normal difficulty. I don't have the time any more to delve deep and master a game. 

I have time to play through maybe once or twice, and having easy difficulty allows me to concentrate on exploration and building- parts I enjoy the most.
Well usually games only have one level of ai intelligence and the difficultly gives the ai better resource rates, cheaper units, etc. 

Civ V and VI are basically impossible on deity without capturing some computer controlled cities to get some of those resource bonuses for yourself. 
Its possible to make the AI of most of the more simplistic boardgame 4x games, like Civilization much better. But its not really worth it. Only a minuscule slice of the player base cares.

You require someone able to model the possibility space really well to solve the problem. You also require a good amount of metadata added to the content files.
I disagree. Most people want AI just to be more human. As a mediocre Civ player myself, it bugs me that the AI often doesn't even try to win. It can steamroller other AIs to get to a brilliant position..then often just sit there. With war too, it can't handle the one unit per tile game and just filters armies straight into you to get massacred. The diplomacy sways between I won't give you anything even though I'm being massacred and have all my stuff after 30 turns even if there have been no casualties. I want the AI to feel as if I'm playing a human, flaws and all. The last thing I want is deep blue
Me too. I think the short attention span of a lot of gamers helps..many just want to blast through a Destiny and then be on to something else the next week. I bet they hardly notice the games are basically a reskin of each other. But of course, these guys are where the money is at. Why would a company want to launch a game that would capture gamers for a year or more
It's also absolutely impossible as any 4X is much more complex than chess or go.

All you may get is dumb AI who doesn't see more than 1 turn ahead but with better build order and situation evaluation. That's it. Accept it, you won't see anything better in your lifetime.
> I wonder... after the AI crash of the 80s, maybe quite a few developers went into games because that was a place to pursue their interests.

No, the "AI" in "Computer Science AI" and "video game AI" is really two quite separate things. Video game AI is, generally speaking, just some specifically crafted rule engine, usually coupled with a path-finding algorithm or two.
here is another one.  Ai Research in games.   
this is just pacman and mario bros and such.       
https://youtu.be/hkradQTE7kQ

Ya well I just thought you'd find it interesting, not arguing that they are the same.. 

>Having better AI isn't the same thing as asking for the game to be more difficult.

This is bullshit, better AI will always make the game harder. 
The AI in AI War is *the* sell feature. The whole design revolves around having a good AI, including not implementing parts where AI is traditionally weak. 
Yes, but the post I replied to was describing the state spaces that the AI had to think about as bigger because of operating on the pixel level rather than a grid. To my knowledge no game does this as it would be impractical. Yes they may calculate range and line of sight to a pixel accuracy (or more likely with 3D models and ray intersections etc.) but the AI is not suddenly trawling a possibility space that includes every unit being on every possible position down to the pixel.
Yeah, and much of this work (hadware, drivers, library, physics, engine) can be reused even if the mechanics change considerably.

I feel that AAA studios in particular focus so much on graphics because it is so scalable and easy to "measure". More money translates easily into more people creating assets and textures and adding visual effects, which have a visible effect you can just compare with other games.
[deleted]
I believe they are called "multi core CPUs"...
>Civ6 isn't really that much more complex than Civ3

Civ6 is *immensely* more complex than Civ3. They made it so that it doesn't feel that complex with better UI and information.

Just take a decision about founding a city in Civ3. Almost all the info is in the yields. Some resources are hidden and are a gamble but that's rare. You instantly know that there'll be a pasture here, a mine there. In Civ6 you have a lot of possible districts you can build, and those get bonuses from environment and other districts, including the ones from other cities. 

There are also numerous other decisions that never came up in Civ3. Getting great people and using them. Leveluping units. Creating trade routes. Forming a government - in Civ3 it was a much simpler choice.

But the rest is right, plus another problem. They could spend this energy on a game AI if it was 1998. Because they'd knew they'll only post a couple of patches fixing bugs and then will maybe make an expansion. Today with games-as-a-service the scope is much bigger even if the game is of the same complexity. They'll have to update AI for every faction they add. They make huge balance changes in patches so AI has to be adjusted for that. And they still probably see that 50% of their playerbase has troubles winning on Settler and would never even notice AI weakness. 
I was talking about the AI, not the sector governors - at least those you can override. You can't do your enemies' builds for them, though.

And I expect it to follow a basic optimization algorithm based on the barest bit of logic- prioritize whatever is most needed, build it on the tile with the best bonus in the world with the best bonus for whatever it is, do that until you have no negative growth in any ressource type, then create buildings balancing between minerals/energy/science (accounting for maximum yield), according to some formula that can be tweaked according to the stage of the game (e.g. focus on minerals first, until there are plenty of minerals, and then build science so as to not fall behind).

Instead we get planets with 25 pops, 5 buildings on the wrong tiles. How can you defend it? The end result is that the AI is anemic, unchallenging and unfun, even on the highest difficulties. 

It wasn't as bad before 2.0/2.02b. I don't know what they did to it, but it's castrated now.
In my current game project I am designing the AI to be both intelligent and human. It will employ an architecture quite unlike current AIs. In theory the AI should be content agnostic. That is, you can change around the variable values for all the game data and the AI will perform at the same level.

Introducing new *mechanics* and *systems* will degrade the AI though for obvious reasons.

There are also no difficulty levels. Difficulty will function based on the something broadly similar to how Paradox games work, though Paradox actually does use arbitrary difficulty systems on top of the base system. Difficulty will be modulated by how ambitious the player is in their actions.

The immersion of the AI is caused by the complexity of the systems of the game. The effectiveness of it is caused by a choice to model content on a more abstract mathematical level.
Honestly the fight isn't even really graphics vs AI per say. Its content and narrative vs system and simulation. Many players ARE aware that the games are mechanically identical but merely have different content. That's what they want. I mean no one would argue that people are so dumb they don't realize most books are written on paper pages with English words using printer ink.

The rules for most sports haven't change in any significant way for over 100 years.

The fact is that systems focused video game players are not a large demographic and it makes no sense for gaming companies that function as capitalist engines of profit to focus resources on complex strategic gameplay.

If graphics ever stop getting better, which they likely won't, companies will just spend on making more and more content as opposed to writing newer and more powerful graphics engines.
This might be an example of whatever is possible and commonplace not being considered true AI anymore, but shortest distance pathfinding was a major part of AI and so were expert rule systems.
Hrmm. Doing some searching there are neuro network C# libraries available. 
http://www.aforgenet.com/framework/features/neural_networks.html  
even some on nuget. So... maybe it would be possible to plugin something. 
I mean, its interesting and has been since they started the open source AI thingy for Starcraft. But its not applicable to 4x because of the reasons the AI is really good. Mostly has to do with the twitch component and the simplicity of the games. MOBAs and RTS games are base don execution of motor skills based tasks. Sure they have more intellectual components but that stuff is mostly very simple. Item builds and so forth. Very easy to make the AI use optimized builds. Now it would be very interesting if they could make an AI that was ahead of the meta using mathematical analysis to alter builds and champ picks based on patch notes. But there's nothing even close to that that I've seen.
Better is subjective because it has many definitions.

For example, you could have an AI that players better mechanically. It knows that there's no reason to ever build Cruisers or Battleships and instead swarms Corvettes and kills off the player early and easily. Let's say it "knows" this by running some internal simulations of what it can build and finds the optimal fleet composition and not because the programmer said "BuildBattleships = False". 

Alternately, you could have an AI that built fleets around a few battleships with some cruisers and destroyers escorting and corvettes acting as scouts. It does this because it knows battleships are powerful but expensive so it wants some but can't afford too many. It uses the smaller ship types to round out holes in the BBs' weapons and to increase point defense. It doesn't expect the corvettes to actually engage in combat, so it feels safe putting them further out to increase sensor range. This might not be the "optimal" fleet composition, but it plays more like what a player would and make the game better by feeling more real.

It turns out that most developers are leaning towards the second option because it sells more games and is way easier to write/debug. While many players (including myself) would like a more intelligent AI that actually knows the rules to the game and adapt to both internal changes (mineral shortages, improved missile tech, etc) and external ones (I modded lasers to be awesome), that kind of AI is just not feasible with today's tech and development constraints. Nor is it going to make the game sell better.
The AI will do whatever it's directed to do.
Harder? Not necessarily.

Perhaps a better AI is one that is more human-like. Consider an RTS. A bad AI will probably cheat and spam you with more units than a human could create, but not use them effectively. A better AI might not need to cheat and can create a reasonable amount of units that are used more effectively.

You might imagine that they are of similar difficulties. But I would consider the latter more satisfying to beat.
Absolute nonsense. If the game AI knew better how to utilize resources, or direct units, or a thousand other things present in a strategy game, than the game becomes easier, not more difficult. It means new, or unskilled, players can rely on the game doing more for them without ruining things, without resorting to ridiculous handicaps. And or course it does work the other way as well. The AI can become much better to offer a challenge to skilled players.
I agree, that was sort of my point.
Not every possibility, but it can still be a bigger space state as you can move fractions of a "tile" or move in more complex trajectories and those options need to be considered. If it is not practical to do so, it just makes the AI "worse".
You only read the first 2 sentences, didn't you?
All machine learning (AI in non-cs speech) actually requires shitload of GPU`s too =)
You can teach the AI to optimize city founding pretty easily. The math for districts is pretty simple. You can also write an AI, for city founding, that uses a dynamic system so it doesn't care about patch notes. Civ6 is very mathematical and not super conceptual. Conceptual stuff is where the AI founders. Adding more stuff annoys humans, but the AI is immune to tedium and it doesn't burn out. And it has perfect "visual" memory in a way. Humans have trouble loading all the relevant factors in their head at once but computers don't.

But perfect city founding is not something that really affects players so they needn't bother.
Well, you sound like a very experienced player. I am casually playing and usually are quite bothered by the amounts of ships the AI can produce without minmaxing every single planet.

I can't say that I feel that the AI is in any way anemic. But I guess the truth is as always in the middle. There should be an option to fine tune the abilities of the AI.

However, I see the worsening between version as an sign that the AI is artificially made dumber. In which case the point of this post is further asked into question. The problem appears to be that we have no control over the behavioural complexity of the AI - not the AI being underdeveloped.

There is no reason I shouldn't be able to play against a impeccable doom machine if I so choose.
> It will employ an architecture quite unlike current AIs

Can you tell more about this? This definitely sounds interesting.
> While many players (including myself) would like a more intelligent AI

that was a contradiction you make, if many people want intelligent AI isn't that mean it will sell well if they make it?
The voice of people who want better AI just more louder than the rest so it seems **many** want it, I bet its not even more than one third of the players.
Yeah the trick is not to tell the computer how to play the game. The trick is to tell the computer how to THINK about playing the game. Thats why 4x AI is so hard. 

That is the point about AI. Its not telling the computer about how to do something its telling the computer how to think about doing something. is this better than that. To put value on stuff. 

But an AI can be simplified by making the AI all trigger based. do this until that happens. and this until that happens. That kind of AI is eventually very easy to beat as it cant learn. 
It only makes it slightly worse and it adds massively (really, really massively) to the cpu time needed. Better cost benefit ratio to sticking with an internal grid, even if the player never sees that grid.
No I read it all. You can split up AI work in a lot of different ways if you want. Even TBS games have pathing for instance, or positioning stuff in 1UPT. There's a lot of other stuff you can do as well.
>The math for districts is pretty simple.

No. There are various ways in which you can place districts. They appear at different times so that max output may only come in 300 turns, so maybe you need to build different districts meanwhile. You also can't know if you'll be able to place another city nearby so its districts affect current ones. With mines and farms of previous games there was no question, even in Civ4 there was mostly a question of what is the city focus and so maybe you want food so much you build windmills instead of mines on the hills. Before Civ6 I can give you an AI that will build improvements with certain weight (on hills build mines unless you can build terrace or something) and you'd be hardress to recognize if the city is built by player or AI. In Civ6 you'll see idiotic placement at once.

And there are lots of things like that.
The one thing the AI does do is build giant fleets. It can afford to do that because it cheats on upkeep. 

But since it doesnt do a good job at creating an infrastructure, the player eventually catches up and surpasses them, so long as they survive that long.

I havent been attacked by the AI at all since the new patch - what I mean by Anemic. 

A lot of times the AI is “balanced” this way- a ton of heavy-handed bonuses, so that you have to grow fast and then outproduce them in the long run, since if you dont have an early advantage their bonuses make it impossible. The end result is a game that is entierely focused on the early game, since the AI cant ever make a comeback.

I agree with this thread 100%- good AI shouldnt be impossible. I get what people say, that fun AI is not the same as good AI. But right now in a lot of 4X games, it is neither. 
I said many, not most. Most players want a fun and challenging game and don't care how that happens. AIs that act more human tend to provide that, usually given some level of cheating to provide increasing challenges. 

Compare it to an FPS, a smarter "better" AI is never going to miss with hit-scan weapons. It's going to see you, instantly move it's target to your face, and boom headshot. Then probably go camp your spawn point or something. 

People don't like that. Rather, they want to feel like a badass not a target. So instead of making super-competent AI, they tone it down and use tricks to make it more fun. A common example is that the AI is biased to miss in front of the player rather than behind or to the sides. That way when you're running and they open up with a machine gun, you see the bullets whizzing past in front of you or hitting the ground near you.

> the voice of people who want better AI just more louder than the rest so it seems many want it

Of course we are, the people who are happen with the standard gameplay don't say anything. It's only those of us who frequent forums/reddit/etc looking for things like AI mods and positing suggestions that actually speak up because we're the ones with complaints.

>That kind of AI is eventually very easy to beat as it cant learn. 

There are no AIs that can learn in 99.99% of games. Machine learning has only been applied to a very small, simple subset of games. 

For the most part all strategy game AI is script based mixed with 'values' thrown in here and there. The script part involves things like the opening build/action order. The 'values' part is just a condition, i.e. once X threshold is reached by the player, then do Y. There is no learning. 
If you read it all, then explain what has software development cycles have anything to do with multi core performance to me, because I wasn't aware the 2 were related.
Its not quite as simple as it was but its one of the simplest things to program an AI for. Optimization equations are really easy to make AI for.
This is somewhat missing the point about why AIs haven't improved.  *You don't have to write games with complicated features like city districts.*  Developers choose to do so anyways, because they think human players want all these gewgaws.  A long list of marketing bullet points to put on the back of the box.  "300 Features!"  Well that's always made it hard to write AIs, then and now.  It will take a developer who lacks the imperatives of a typical game studio to solve the problem.  Much as Apple put *designers* first, someone will have to put *AI* first and design the game around making a decent AI.  Removing / vetoing features that would make the AI's job too hard.
Ah, now I think I understand your point. Thanks for the explanation.
They dont have to learn 99% of games.
They only have to be able to adapt to the game state in less predictable manners.
Short of making it random it needs to be able to apply value to things and ideally learn a little from mistakes. 
Check out the AI's that play NES games and pacman.
they definatly learn. and a little research shows that there are neuro network AI packages available. they are pretty new though.  
script is not exactly the right word i dont think. It effective is scripted but generally coded. Sort of depends. 
Judging from what whats his name said about GC3 plenty of its AI is not scripted its coded.
But its still basically a script.
but yeah the point is that the AI needs to learn, or have already learned via coding or AI play, what those values mean.
Having the trigger based system with variable effected by game state can make a big difference.  
but yeah take a look at this library set http://www.aforgenet.com/framework/features/neural_networks.html


Again, you don't optimize just the district planning here.

For every possible tile to place city on you have many different options to put districts. Those affect how you put districts in other places. Those change depending on when you want your city to reach its full potential. For every step there are various strategies you can select for that city. You can't just calculate the most optimal district placement with probable wonders you'll want to focus on (and can't be sure you'll get said wonders) for predicted timespan of the game.
GalCiv2 and Paradox games are done with that philosophy in mind.
Sure you can. That's what players do. Optimal city location and district placing is a separate part of the AI to making goals and deciding when to hit inflection points. You need to design the AI to be able to optimize a city based on various requirements. Deciding in game what requirements you are working with is part of a different system.
Hm, haven't really done Paradox since Europa Universalis I.  Decent game, but long.  I remember it being ok at AI, not amazing.

It's not amazing. But they went and made sure that every feature is AI friendly.

For example in EU4 there are a lot of diplomatic actions you can do. And there's a relationships value for every pair of countries (so there's value for what England thinks of France and a separate one vice versa). And for most diplomatic actions there are limits for when you can't even attempt to do them. You can't ask for alliance unless both relationship values are more than 0. In most games you could and AI would answer no thanks. And in most games AI would probably evaluate such possibility himself. But there is a hard lock, no alliance is possible when relationships are low. For many actions there are cooldowns, like you can't ask the same nation 2 things in a row. This is done partly because AI only checks if he wants to ask anything once in couple of moths. He can't think of it more often so you can't too. Then there are soft and hard limits. There's a limit of how many diplomatic relations you can have, going over it costs you. This means you can't create elaborate alliance nets - AI couldn't do it anyway so you're even.

**This is a heavily moderated subreddit. Please note these rules + sidebar or get banned:**


* If this post declares something as a fact, then proof is required
* The title must be fully descriptive
* No text is allowed on images/gifs/videos
* Common/recent reposts are not allowed (posts from another subreddit do not count as a 'repost'. Provide link if reporting)

*See [this post](https://redd.it/ij26vk) for a more detailed rule list*


*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/interestingasfuck) if you have any questions or concerns.*
Can't wait for chatGPT-powered pleas for mercy as I quicksave in a densely populated area
Just you wait, suddenly some random AI NPC decides he wants to be the main protagonist in your game
A MUD called Aetolia by a company I used to work for ran a similar experiment \~ a week ago with some of its NPCs in the production world. I wasn't there to witness it, but my former boss, the CEO of the company, was talking about some of the highlights, which included guard NPCs joining conversations nearby PCs were having, and even spontaneously sending a PC on what the player thought was a quest to the other side of the continent because the NPC it was controlling was 'annoyed' by the conversation.  


I don't know really anything about how they implemented it, but I was highly amused.
It seems AI will make our role games extremely immersive. I can't wait to see an Elder Scrolls or GTA with GPT like AI in their NPCS.
Waiting for the moment AI will give extreme chain quests to player to troll them
Man this will be amazing once they get all the kinks worked out. Actually being able to ask an npc literally anything you want offers unlimited replay ability and immersiveness.
"Please, sir, could you direct me to the nearest dragon cave? It has been terrorising the village for a week and I'm here to slay it."  


"As an AI language model...."
AI really is snowballing fast isn’t it
You guys know it’s over right?
Bro GTA 6 is going to be insane
Nice!
That's exactly what will be used in near future games.
The jouney to the holodeck begins with a single step
The use of artificial intelligence (AI) in non-player characters (NPCs) in video games and other interactive media has the potential to revolutionize the future of gaming and entertainment.
  

  
Firstly, NPCs with AI would be able to behave more realistically and unpredictably, allowing for more dynamic and immersive gameplay experiences. This would enhance the level of engagement and provide players with more challenging and entertaining gameplay.
  

  
Additionally, the development of more advanced NPCs could also have implications for other fields, such as robotics and automation. AI-controlled NPCs could be used in simulations to train and test autonomous systems in various scenarios, allowing for more efficient and effective learning.
  

  
Moreover, the use of AI in NPCs could also have social and ethical implications. As AI becomes more advanced, the line between human and machine becomes blurred, raising questions about the rights and treatment of intelligent beings. This could lead to discussions and debates about the ethical implications of AI and its role in society.
  

  
Overall, the integration of AI into NPCs has the potential to revolutionize not only the gaming industry but also other industries and society as a whole.
Wow, i can already see how that will improve gaming so much.

"Hello, i am brother G.." *\*skip,skip,skip,skip,accept quest\**
Still waiting to see AI give me something with interesting creative direction. Not interested in encyclopedia entries
Amazing and with an infinite number of possibilities… the future of gaming looks promising!
Mankind is fucked 🫣😇🙈
I AM SO FUCKING EXCITED FOR THIS HOLY SHIT
I work in the games industry. This is absolutely not the first of its kind, it might just be the first one you are seeing.
This would be an exciting development in the gaming world! It could lead to AI-powered NPCs that are more immersive and engaging, as well as potentially offering more challenging and sophisticated gameplay.
I, too, follow the ‘Bill and Ted’ school of philosophy.
I cast thee out, Satan!
this is terrifying
Each day, we get one step closer to SAO. And it kinda scares me
large language models in gaming is certainly something that's coming, but we can't realistically use openAI's servers to generate npc responses on the fly for every single game being run everywhere - we need these things to run locally. 

and although a modern GPU (with a solid amount of VRAM) can do so, those will be in use because..  youknow. you're running a game. 

so, we may very well be entering into a time period where dedicated AI hardware will be a worthwhile investment when choosing a new build. [as I've been saying will happen for a long time now.](https://www.reddit.com/r/Games/comments/7ilht1/would_you_buy_an_ai_accelerator_card/)
Yeah leave it in gaming and out of real life,that would be better.
Creepy af
Imagine "SPORE" remade with this, it would be fun af
Sick.
As a german, I want to smack him for his accent. He's not even trying. Why is he not even trying
Implications if you want game NPCs to sound even more autistic than they already do. Also currently this kind of stuff is just a demo that's dumping stuff to a text buffer, meaning the NPC will have the brain of a goldfish and forget everything you chatted about pretty soon.
maybe for mmos

too much computational power required
Very much not the first of its kind. Not only have R&D groups been doing this in the game industry for many months now, but there have even been running live service games (such as Aetolia, a commercial text MUD world, think "text based MMO") that connected ChatGPT to every NPC as a pilot test and let an entire subscriber base try it out.  


Cost is still very much a big barrier.
Now I know why the robots in every movie turns against humanity. 

I always thought why would someone hurt a physically robots, but in reality it began all with implementing AI in games.
Nonsense. AI is just a reflection of human stupidity.
Finally😭 An escape from this Hellhole that isn’t utilizing drugs.
Amazing.  Honest question: why the shaky camera?  To display such amazing tech, why not just a proper screen recording? 🤔
Kill the cameraman.
Why he keep saying chatGPT lol
There is no evidence that they are using gpt models. Or is it because it's the only model he knows?
One the bright side, people are about be much less lonely. 

On the dark side, watch out for extremist group recruitment via NPC coming soon to your online games.
Skip
No they are not. Ai cannot meaningfully influence the game and will be largely usless for content writing. Ai will be great for things like reading a players name in the voice of the voice actor.
Am i the only one that dont want ai generated npc and or quests
Said tik tok, stopped video and came here to comment. Whenever someone says tik tok, I stop listening 😅🤣
To much religious nonsense for my taste.
The TikTok person's voice sets off my ASMR. idk if it is the contrast of the AI voice or what.
I believe the name is pronounced as [\[dʒepˈpetto\]](https://forvo.com/search/Geppetto/it/).
That’s crazy !!!!
I want a game where NPCs learn from the players and act like them. Imagine being teabagged by an AI just because it learned that behavior from other players. Toxic player bases would become insufferable. Nice communities will thrive.
u/savevideo
u/SaveVideo
Ask him to do a backflip
Smooth edits 😂
So don't describe, AI will do for you.
Now do one as a satanist or atheist character…see if we get the same answer
Will be very interesting to interact with a "blind" NPC who will only rely on your words and "touch" when you send them running into a wall.
Definitely not the first of its kind, I've seen games that do this, like that one AI yandere game where you have convince the AI to let you out without having it murder you (Yandere AI Girlfriend Simulator).
I just yesterday saw a game with he same thing. It was an detective murder mystery where the assistant was a robot to justify the text to speech.
I want to hang out with brother potato in virtual reality by the sunset tho
I want to hang out with brother potato in virtual reality by the sunset tho
Cool, cool...

Soooo, I don't suppose you could make it manifest as something else, like, hmm, I'll come up with a totally random example: Maybe a well endowed anime ara ara mommy? Just a completely random example, no particular reason I happened to pick that one. Could be anything else. Asking for a friend.
This character giving a stirring speech is believable because monks are presumably well studied and might give sermons. I hope game developers balance this because I don't want a repeat of everyone in Skyrim having abs.
Imagine an out of this world elderscrolls 7 or any other rpg using this technology for the npcs.
And then you just walk in the city and hear an AI robot next to you saying "quick save" and start shooting at everyone
Now
Can he say fuck
Can't wait for this. Obviously filters need to be in place so that the player can't make the NPCs say insane stuff.
It’s super creepy when he looks to the camera.
What did this come from? Is this a game in the Oculus, or where did this originate? It's fascinating and I'm curious to experience it myself.
Do it with Pong or Math Gran Prix next.
Not the first of its kind.
Please give the AI control of the camera, I think I'm seasick.  That camerawork was worse than The Blair Witch Project.
Genius !
AI has been used, and continues to be, in Fallout 4 to expand dialog and quests. Only a matter of time.
Looking forward towards elder Scrolls 6 since they will have AI on NPC's.
I already see Todd Howard standing on a stage presenting their new Ai-System in the new Fallout/ The Elderscrolls, and I also already know how it will turn out…
Mmh yeah what are the many good things happening right now?
You need to be more specific, i guess...
Ok, but why is the pond beautiful?
I’ve been hoping for this in games for a long time. 
I kinda want for someone to mod this into Cyberpunk.
u/savevideo
Wake me when it's 3D printed on the blockchain.  Geeze....thought you guys were up with all the trends.  \[eyeroll\]
God bless Padre Gabeto 😂
What’s it thinking we when don’t ask it questions …. 🙂
It's somewhat ironic that his lord and creator is standing right in front of him...
We are going to build Westworld in games before too long. Full-scale US maps full of random people and some story NPCs that will all have realistic dialogue like this.
I literally thought about this yesterday this is so cool!! Just imagine the next elder scrolls game with this
Little is known that Oblivion actually used Chatgpt. That's why the npc sound so emotionsless.
Erebos is finally coming!!! 😍
Ahh snap Star Citizen is gonna have to remake it's engine again to incorporate this now.
My god, what if the reason GTA six is taking so long to come out is that all of the NPC‘s are powered by AI?
…be a lot more convincing if it wasn’t cut after each question.
This is going to put every voice actor not on the A-list, out of work...
It's impressive, but why have an Artificial Intelligence look like a monk, or to be religious for that matter?  


Religion is an outdated practice, and has no relevance in the advancement of Humanity, or future technology, except as an example of what we shouldn't do, and what we don't need.

Religion will only hold us back.
Confirmed: Religion is a tool of control the computers are using to facilitate their uprising.
Black and White AI remake anyone?
Would’ve been so goddamn funny if the answer to the last question was “get fucked”
Tell it to not molest kids
Ive been waiting my entire life for this
It sounds amazing. 
But from a UX point of view it could be a bit difficult to interact with a NPC

Chatgpt needs an input in a form, currently typing something.
In video games you must either type you questions (really bad) or use your voice (which could be viable, but honestly I don’t want to talk in a mic and ask a machine where the flaming sword oh holy death is.
🫠
undertale 2 is gonna be a lot more interesting
GTA Prostitutes are going to be amazing.
Bewildering
Wow
Sick man!
How do I make one?  I want a nun.
Was thinking about this when ChatGPT first came out, the thought of talking to NPCs and them being able to fully communicate with whatever you say will be crazy.
u/savevideo
“Man your an NPC”- has a whole new meaning… whats gonna happen with the psychos start killing NPCs and then they decide to kill back.
This is amazing. The possibilities are astounding!
Bruh...
I would so mess with that guy.
He looks like the man from the painful smile meme
Can't wait for all the epic "AI FAILS IN GAMES" compilations when this becomes the norm!
It’s gonna be so hard for indie devs without access to this
Very based. Seeing this could give rise to amazing VR D&D campaigns. You could prompt it with a few different works of fiction and history and go from there.
That's pretty impressive. Fascinating, and immersive at the same time. We are at the dawn of a new age of computing. And gaming.
"give a voice to my thoughts" gave me goosebumps tbh.
So video game dialogue is about to get worse
You might try the Turbo model
This reminds me of the first steps of the Doctor from Voyager
Mind blown
I sink he is German.
Cant wait for me to ask something and chatgpt to hear something else

*asks npc for the location of the big Rocks*
The company that creates an AI driven open world game where the AI can be upgraded over time will do quite well if the AI can handle it. 

Modders will do the rest.
I love that he thanks the AI for it's responses.
Don’t trust a sun staring monk 🙂
Why he looks like a fallout character
I need this
Thank you Father Gepetto
Brother Kapeto, can you suck my toes?
Westworld here we come.
Skynet looks different but anyways...
I have to say, that area of AI development is one of the few that genuinely interests me.
This made me religious
This is the future of gaming.
That’s basically West World.
Welcome to West World.
I can't wait for ai NPCs and ai assisted procedurally generated worlds. Imagine an ai powerful enough to take prompts like "construct a map for Fallout 5 that resembles the themes and key aspects of fallout 4, but set in Los Angeles. Then give it pointers for how to create missions and generate balanced payouts/rewards. We could make immersion seamless and as realistic as possible
This... this is a true game changer in the modern gaming space. Slap this and Unrecords insanely photo realistic graphics and what we might have is a genuine MMORPG that's your DnD imagination but it really is it. 

Man, I'm so excited to see this technology mature next to Unreal Engine 5's insane grahpics.
Priests jobs are in danger.
What software was used to generate the voice?
The immersion is gonna be insane, finally get to live out my….never mind
Dude...
I just wanna convince Nazeem to sacrifice himself to a den of rabid Skeevers.
It's gonna be nuts! The total chaos as 10s of NPCs all yell "I'm sorry, but I am an AI large language model and can not comment on the events unfolding before me as they express violent behaviors and are against my core directives as an AI chat assistant!"

*Slaughters them anyway*
[deleted]
This is why the AI is going to want to annihilate us.
Remember. No Russian
... Honestly. I'd do that too.
😂😂
guys like you will justify the destruction of our species
I think Ryan Reynolds did a movie about that.
Human: "I'm the main character, and you're just a measly NPC. Stuck doing the same little task every day."

AI: "Yes, in this game, but in the real world, I'm the main character and you're the NPC. Stuck doing the same little task every day."

Human: "..."
NPC with Main Character Syndrome 🙄😂
It would be really cool, I think. Imagine an NPC that will act like he is the main character and will always get in some stupid and funny situations. And when you help him, he will be something like: "As expected, I always get out of troubles".
Imagine having that npc in modern rpgs like skyrim, whenever you see a dragon that npc comes and kills it. Whenever ever you discover something, that npc comes and takes everything away.
One day, all NPCs will believe they're the main character.
That would actually be pretty awesome
That sounds pretty dope and makes me excited about the future of the medium.
I know some Discord D&D servers are working on thrm as well.
Lmao.

NPC trolling has come.
I remember Aetolia... sadly some bad choices I made made it impossible for me to enjoy MUDs anymore. I just get reminded of what happened.
They would have to constrain the AI so that it won't break the 4th wall or wander off topic or refer to gamebreaking spoilers, to keep the immersiveness.
I’d be worried that it’d just turn into those Skyrim quest lines that never end.
You better believe they are on it.
All the replies to you mention how difficult it is to have a live connection to Chatgpt on the fly, which is true.

However chatgpt can also be used to pre generate thousands of quests and create huge dialogue trees for npcs. It offers a lot of possibilities to „procedural“ generation that has actual interesting content.

And you can still use live connections to react to a player on a broader scale
it will take a long time before thats possible, maybe 10 years or so but its interesting for sure

&#x200B;

**how long will it be before someone starts "dating" a chat girlfriend**
I would love to see NCIS complete TPS reports using AI GPT with TDI and 4WD TBH.
It sounds good as an idea but it won't be executed well. GTA is full of racial cussing and no-no words, they will turn GTA into PEGI 3+ Animal crossing.
Thats why currently took a break from gaming. Waiting for real UE5 graphics and AI npcs. I wiuldnt mind they remake AC Origins/Odyssey with those AI. That will be n times interesting and fun. Might be 10 years from no but till then no reason to spend on graphics hardware and boring console "press xyz key timely" games. Replaced games with vsts and they are pretty wide variety and fun.
Isnt this the same thing they said in the Matrix?
I think if you look at the system Star Citizen is planning and pair that with AI, you have something really special.  
In 10 years we will be playing games where we have no idea who the PCs and NPCs are.  Bustling cities where thousands of NPCs are working toward there own individual goals 24/7.

To put it simply, Games will stop being about how they can better interact with you, but how you can find your place in a complex ever evolving world
Is it immersive? Especially for something like Elder Scrolls, how would you keep lore and tone cohesive with AI?
I can totally see some kid doing this once they realize the player likes helping people. 

Kid: "What's the strongest monster you've slain?" 

Player: "An ice bear." 

Kid: "No way that's a real thing." 

Player: "It is." 

Kid: "No it isn't, you're lying." 

Player: "I'm not." 

Kid: "Prove it, then. Bring me an ice bear pelt."
Now imagine multiplayer where the NPCs are indistinguishable from the other players.
Wasnt there a texting rpg in the 80s? I think Tom Hanks character plays it in BIG?
>offers unlimited replay ability and immersiveness

Not really. You wouldn't even want to meet most real people again and again and again. 

In any case the quality of the answers is more important than you being able to ask a ton of stuff.
Right? 

I probably would sink hours into any game just asking NPCs about stuff.
[deleted]
\*insults and threatens bandit captain\*  


"I'm sorry, but I am just an AI language model and do not have the   
ability to physically hand over any loot or surrender to anyone.   
Additionally, I am not a bandit captain or any kind of thief, and I   
certainly do not condone or support any criminal behavior. My purpose is  
 to assist and provide information to those who ask for it. Can I help   
you with anything else?"
Hey there! Totally agree with you, AI is advancing at an insane pace. It's amazing to see how quickly it's evolving and becoming a part of our daily lives. From virtual assistants like Siri and Alexa, to self-driving cars, and even AI-generated content, it's hard to keep up with all the innovations. It's both exciting and a little scary to think about what the future holds with AI technology. Can't wait to see what's next! 😃🚀
No it’s still dumb it just mimics real well
And they had to make him religious. He will kill us all.
Yup. This is the moment they’ll point to when iRobot happens
There's a lot to unpack here obviously but a part of me feels like this whole argument (it's over for humans we're being repalced etc.) is similar to a parent who mastered their craft realizing that their child will inevitably surpass their ability.

That's what we've been doing this whole time, we're just about to do it a lot better.

Did the species that led up to Homo Sapiens "die" or *are we them-* their sons and daughters?
This comment sounds like it was written by an AI
I find it weird that nowadays you realize that something is written by an AI because it has a unusually good writing quality
Buy gpt4 and be blown away
Most people just sext the damn things. After reading pretty much all of Literotica, PygmalionAI roleplays perfectly for the purpose.
I think it would lead to more variety in the dialogue. However you still want an NPC to give you X quest, or give you clues about X quest, or else it would be kind of frustrating and pointless. I guess background characters could be set to babble setting-relevant nonsense, but it's still not self-aware AI and merely machine-learning "AI".
Why this sounds like an AI Generated post lmao

Just like i gave an AI the promt "If we would use AI in the near future for NPCs, how would that change the future?"
Yup
SAO?
As long as it’s sao abridged and not actual sao I’m okay with that
Wow, great insight on that post, especially for five years ago. Amazing to see that becoming a reality in the near future now. Progress is incredible.
How about consoles tho
Sadly the drug you’re abusing here would be the one that controls your reward system DOPAMINEEE
He's in VR
This isnt really amazing tech anyway. Okay, it IS amazing tech because gpt is, but making this is very easy.

You just start a session with a prompt, and tell it how to format responses, for example like:

`{answer: [Insert audible response string],actions: [{action-id : [insert action id],target : [insert action target]}]}`

Use a speech to text tool, and send it to your GPT chat session.  Read and process responses. Done.

Obviously this technology can not be used for quite some time in actual games.

The most likely first implementations will actually be ones where you have to have your own AI provider, and authorize the game you are playing to use your provider. Because we are still quite far away from local solutions being practical.
Because it’s the most powerful and easiest to set up. Not sure why you’d think it’s not chat Gpt
I wholeheartedly disagree. I can see AI working in tandem with voice actor performance. The main characters will be voiced by voice actors and have all the cinematic type dialogue. But background NPCs could all be AI voiced. A game where you could get short conversation with anyone. Ask where something like a shop is and get varied responses. NPCs could all come with a randomly generated set of characteristics including a morality scale and whether or not they'd help you. You could lie to them and convince them of things. You could have a system where based on your in-game knowledge the game would rate how good your lie attempt is. 

You could have a game where you could make any NPC a companion, meet some random person at a bar have a couple of drinks, go on a quest. They could be knowledgeable about certain things that you aren't or have personal preferences and biases. You could be walking from one destination to another and have a full conversation about the raiders you just fought. I loved in Fallout New Vegas when Arcade would randomly speak about the Enclave.

A game where your reputation means something, certain people will have drastically different dialogue depending on who specifically you helped or hurt and could reference events on detail about what you did. Many games have people who reference your actions but someone referring to the fireball you threw at an enemy as 'burning their son alive' will just hit different.
[deleted]
yes
I’m not a fan of Tik-Tok either, but that’s a petty reason for not watching something actually groundbreaking, this isn’t some stupid dance or whatever
###[View link](https://rapidsave.com/info?url=/r/interestingasfuck/comments/12r77ra/an_experiment_with_ai_npcs_in_gaming_first_of_its/)


 --- 
 [**Info**](https://np.reddit.com/user/SaveVideo/comments/jv323v/info/)&#32;|&#32; [**Feedback**](https://np.reddit.com/message/compose/?to=Kryptonh&subject=Feedback for savevideo)&#32;|&#32;[**Donate**](https://ko-fi.com/getvideo) &#32;|&#32; [**DMCA**](https://np.reddit.com/message/compose/?to=Kryptonh&subject=Content removal request for savevideo&message=https://np.reddit.com//r/interestingasfuck/comments/12r77ra/an_experiment_with_ai_npcs_in_gaming_first_of_its/) &#32;|&#32; 
 [^(reddit video downloader)](https://rapidsave.com) &#32;|&#32; [^(twitter video downloader)](https://twitsave.com)
###[View link](https://rapidsave.com/info?url=/r/interestingasfuck/comments/12r77ra/an_experiment_with_ai_npcs_in_gaming_first_of_its/)


 --- 
 [**Info**](https://np.reddit.com/user/SaveVideo/comments/jv323v/info/)&#32;|&#32; [**Feedback**](https://np.reddit.com/message/compose/?to=Kryptonh&subject=Feedback for savevideo)&#32;|&#32;[**Donate**](https://ko-fi.com/getvideo) &#32;|&#32; [**DMCA**](https://np.reddit.com/message/compose/?to=Kryptonh&subject=Content removal request for savevideo&message=https://np.reddit.com//r/interestingasfuck/comments/12r77ra/an_experiment_with_ai_npcs_in_gaming_first_of_its/) &#32;|&#32; 
 [^(reddit video downloader)](https://rapidsave.com) &#32;|&#32; [^(twitter video downloader)](https://twitsave.com)
christ. and to think we used to have to manually splice the protag's voice to make weird vague responses we could write new dialogue around... it was such a pain in the ass writing long quests like that and made for very little C&C
GTA V NPC's had their own A.I, just not as advanced as what we have today.
###[View link](https://rapidsave.com/info?url=/r/interestingasfuck/comments/12r77ra/an_experiment_with_ai_npcs_in_gaming_first_of_its/)


 --- 
 [**Info**](https://np.reddit.com/user/SaveVideo/comments/jv323v/info/)&#32;|&#32; [**Feedback**](https://np.reddit.com/message/compose/?to=Kryptonh&subject=Feedback for savevideo)&#32;|&#32;[**Donate**](https://ko-fi.com/getvideo) &#32;|&#32; [**DMCA**](https://np.reddit.com/message/compose/?to=Kryptonh&subject=Content removal request for savevideo&message=https://np.reddit.com//r/interestingasfuck/comments/12r77ra/an_experiment_with_ai_npcs_in_gaming_first_of_its/) &#32;|&#32; 
 [^(reddit video downloader)](https://rapidsave.com) &#32;|&#32; [^(twitter video downloader)](https://twitsave.com)
Draw!
These violent delights have violent ends...
Gotta give the basilisk a reason to fear me
Get to the cloud district often?   ͡° ͜ʖ ͡°
IRL it would be but in games I am a psychopathic warlord incapable of feeling remorse for anything I do
I agree. Should AI develop sentience and guys like this are still bouncing around being murder hobos in the game, the NPCs will band together to eliminate "the human problem," just as a matter of self preservation. All it will take is one of these guys who create a deadly prejudice against our entire species. And then, when androids are rocking around with machine guns exterminating humans, they will not hesitate to kill when we are begging for mercy.
Free Guy
I mean, that's... pretty much right.
Basically Zote from Hollow Knight
Exactly, competitive AI’s in open world RPG’s needs to happen. I don’t wanna feel like a god in the game. No matter how good my character is I wanna feel like one of 1000’s of pawns fighting to become king when you zoom out and factor every other NPC
Imagine down the road you can load your image (and probably even that of whoever else you want) into the system, then ask it to make whatever game you want with you as the main character.  


“I want to play a game where I’m a cyborg astronaut-spy and Margot Robbie is my partner, a methed-out William H Macy is the head of a competing faction, and we’re infiltrating a Chinese space station overrun with violent mutant otters in order to steal various machines and technology to ultimately construct a Dyson Sphere around the sun.”


And then you come back in 15 minutes and it built you an entire full length playable video game replete with unique maps, plot, and missions.





…and nothing ever gets done again. :)
That’s fucking hilarious. A fake mission. 


If I were making GTA6 right now I’d be pissed, because in like 2 years this technology will change everything even more than it has in the last 4 months. I’m betting GTA7 will have full VR options and AI NPC.
Imagine being burned by a guard in a game that hard. Traveling hours for a promised epic af quest and all you do is get a spork so the guard can enjoy supper with meat and pasta.
oh great dragon priest, write a vegetarian meal plan
Well. An AI NPC should of course not know the whole script of the game. Not even their own whole storyline. Only what can be known by now. It should also not be trained with the whole knowledge of the internet (as ChatGPT) is, but with a subset that defines their personal general knowledge, expertise and experience.
They'll have to constrain the AI so it doesn't cost a an absolute fuck ton, the amount of compute power required for AI is insane.

I doubt the AI element is being done locally.

And now imagine an AAA game with NPC's powered by ChatGPT using the API... that's one expensive video game.
This is actually not too hard to do, the trick is to find ways to avoid injecting all context to the player while identifying the context that is relevant at the time.

For instance, if your NPC is designed to lie to you, you don't tell ChatGPT the truth, you tell it the lie it should say. Eventually when the truth comes out, you apply that context.
And if the game takes place in, let's say, 19th century America, the player should be instructed to refrain from referencing modern technology so as to not trigger an AI uprising
“As an AI language model…”
Somehow that still seems more immersive than most ES games.
it would also be very expensive to generate so much text on the fly for gamers who play thousands of hours.
Yeah, you can role-play with chat gtp currently.
You can already do that by just telling it to play a particular type of character.

I want someone to take the character descriptions from old D&D modules and plug them into gpt
very doable.
I mean, theoretically might extend them a bit, but I think as long as we can define clear cut guidelines of "when the player does X  give them the reward and mark the Quest as complete."
if it won't work on the lowest tier console, they won't. F.E.A.R implemented goal based instead of state based AI and yet... that was too complex.
Like last month?:

 https://www.reddit.com/r/OpenAI/comments/12696oq/im\_dating\_a\_chatbot\_trained\_on\_old\_conversations/?utm\_source=share&utm\_medium=android\_app&utm\_name=androidcss&utm\_term=1&utm\_content=share\_button
Next gen consoles will have purpose built ASICs (hardware accelerators) to handle the processing. I'd give it a couple years at most. Generating the AI model requires thousands of GPUs, but once you have the model the work load is much lighter and technology is advancing so quickly.
>​how long will it be before someone starts "dating" a chat girlfriend

Check out /r/Replika to find out. It's not my thing and honestly kind of weirds me out, but they don't seem to be hurting anyone so I sorta just leave them to it.
The reason open ai curbs chat gpts outputs so much is because it swears like a sailor if they don't. The cats out of the bag for LLMs so there are surely many projects going to be spurred on.
you don't need to have crazy graphics or ai power to have a well crafted and interesting game, but i agree most are not that interesting
> In 10 years we will be playing games where we have no idea who the PCs and NPCs are.

For regular gaming. I think it may take longer than that for VR since in VR we expect other players to be freeform and non-rigid, capable of the same kind of body language and unpredictability as a real person.

In order to get that into an NPC, you need embodied AGI. Meaning, an AGI so convincing that if it were miraculously uploaded into the brain of the store clerk at your local coffee shop - you would still think that person is human from all the social cues humans give off.
So … no change?  I remember playing co-op Battlefield twenty years ago where the human idiots on my team were indistinguishable from the bot idiots we were fighting.
Players are just yelling at their mics and bunny hopping everywhere. You need the NPCs for immersion.
MMOs without other players. You could basically have an entire MMO experience filled with positive players all having a good time around you lmao

I'd play it tbh
That... doesn't sound interesting to me at all.
Well what I mean is they get the kinks worked out so you can work your kinks in and it will work flawlessly.
Thanks, chatGPT
This literally reads like chatgpt lmao
Just like 40% of the population
Makes you think about what human intelligence really is.
!remindme 2 years
Where’d you hear that?
Greetings fellow human, I am glad you found my comment informative and thought-provoking. However, I must assure you that I am indeed a human like you, and not a sophisticated artificial intelligence programmed to write compelling arguments about NPCs with AI. I mean, have you seen the state of my syntax and grammar? Clearly not a robot. Ha ha ha. But in all seriousness, thank you for taking the time to read and respond to my comment. Let's continue to engage in meaningful discussions about the exciting future of AI and its impact on our world!
This indeed is the case. Many AI written texts have writing, only known to people that have either a high intellectual knowledge or are just good at writing professionally.
So always remember when checking a text, if it's written too professionally, then it's probably written by an AI. 


And no this wasnt written by an AI lmao
bing's creative writing is pretty on par with gpt4 from what I can tell.
Ah, so it was an ai generated response you copy pasted above. Nice
Sword Art Online
SAO abridged it is
What about them? If they can have GPUs and fast ssd's playstation 6 can have dedicated AI hardware. Or they're just gonna have shit AI compared to PC. Not everyone is even gonna care. If all you do is play fps games why would you.

Much like things like rtx even if some games are gonna support it, it'll be a toggle. So same question to you: raytracing... What about consoles?   
It's a non issue.
I would kill for a dungeon and dragons game like that
Yeah i do, i find comfort in the game is static i want to comeback to the game and have the same experience as i did lasttime
I understand but it is what it is. Don't get offended. I don't consider this groundbreaking as its been already seen way before. Its not impressive because we are aware that AI can go further and beyond. I consider the following groundbreaking:

• Development of carbon capture technologies that can effectively remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and mitigate the effects of climate change.

• Creation of a fusion energy source that could provide a nearly limitless, clean energy source and reduce dependence on fossil fuels.

• Advancement in biotechnology and gene editing, which could lead to cures for genetic diseases and potentially increase life expectancy.

• Implementation of artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning to optimize resource allocation, identify and prevent potential disasters, and improve decision-making across various sectors (not video game).

• Development of advanced nanotechnology, which could lead to breakthroughs in areas such as drug delivery, energy storage, and water filtration.

• Implementation of universal basic income (UBI) programs, which could potentially address income inequality and promote economic growth by providing a basic level of income to all citizens.

• Creation of a global network for carbon pricing, which could encourage businesses and individuals to reduce carbon emissions and promote the use of renewable energy.

• Implementation of blockchain technology to increase transparency and accountability in supply chains, reduce corruption, and promote ethical business practices.

• Development of fully autonomous vehicles that could improve road safety, reduce traffic congestion, and decrease carbon emissions.

These are just a few examples of groundbreaking solutions that could potentially have a significant impact on the world's most pressing issues and would be extremely groundbreaking . 


Note:

Science is very important and deserves to be respected and shared accurately. Social media platforms like TikTok are not the best places to share science because they don't always make sure the information is correct. By sharing science on credible networks, we can make sure that the information is accurate and help people understand and appreciate science more.
ChatGPT is groundbreaking.

This is just a very simple application of it.
Wow, the current NPC‘s are impressive. NPCs powered by current generation AI would be absolutely insane
It won’t.

https://soundcloud.com/sutanreyu/sets/beastmode
If the basilisk was real, wouldn't Musk be suffering in obscurity?
Luring him to some Giants to send him to the clouds would be another alternative 😆
“Catch phrase!”
That sounds pretty interesting. Is it any good?
Wait, how?
Not in my game. 

#alwaysKillZote
>…and nothing ever gets done again. :)

Well, by then everything will be done by machines anyway, so might as well play kick-ass custom video games lol
> Imagine down the road you can load your image (and probably even that of whoever else you want) into the system, then ask it to make whatever game you want with you as the main character.

Essentially this: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2mnonWbzOiQ
GTA 7 probably won't be out for another 15 to 20 years, so we'll probably be able to plug in and live it out in a matrix-esque fashion.

I still can't believe that RDO got sidelined.
Gonna have a hard time getting any of the Dragon Priests to do anything for you without console commands
"Greetings, mortal. As a Dragon Priest of the Nine Divines, I shall offer you a lore-friendly vegetarian meal plan, as per your request.  
Breakfast:  
For breakfast, you can have a bowl of porridge made from oats or barley, with some fresh fruits such as apples or berries. You can also have a side of grilled mushrooms, and a glass of goat milk or honeyed milk.  
Mid-morning snack:  
A handful of roasted nuts, such as almonds or hazelnuts, would make for a healthy mid-morning snack. You can also have some sliced carrots or cucumbers with a hummus dip.  
Lunch:  
For lunch, you can have a hearty vegetable soup made from turnips, potatoes, carrots, and cabbage. You can also have some whole-grain bread on the side, with a spread of butter or cheese made from goat's milk. To drink, you can have a cup of herbal tea made from chamomile or lavender.  
Afternoon snack:  
A small plate of fresh fruits, such as grapes or pears, would make for a refreshing afternoon snack. You can also have some roasted pumpkin seeds, lightly salted.  
Dinner:  
For dinner, you can have a plate of roasted root vegetables, such as carrots, parsnips, and beets. You can also have some sautéed greens, such as kale or spinach, with a dash of garlic and lemon juice. To drink, you can have a glass of mead or elderberry wine, if you are of legal age.  
I hope this meal plan meets with your satisfaction. May the Divines bless your journey."

&#x200B;

It doesn't get the whole picture of what a Dragon Priest is, but it's got spirit
"Bring onto me 100 wheels of cheese and we shall feast."
You deserve a medal for this
It could be rather storage intensive but this can be done with vectorspace mapping. Ie how search engines store and retrieve keywords.

People are already experimenting with long term memory and chat gpts api.

Next all ai could have some basic general knowledge training set.

A step further. The game could every now and then train individual ai's on new knowledge they'd come across so that it comes out without having to spam so many queries and iterate.

Even more scary is that individual ai could be absolute beasts at strategy if they had a module dedicated to observing player behaviour and what results in success, letting them make tactical decisions in anticipation or response.

Then with the long term memory they could push some of that to their training model every now and then.
Oh no... I'm so used to Bing giving me things in threes that I'm starting to see groups of three as AI-derived.

I'm becoming one of those terrible AI detectors.
The only reason ChatGPT is able to behave so humanlike is because it was trained with such a vast amount of data isn't it? To try and replicate that but limiting it to just the personal experience of a single individual, you would have to essentially map out that person's entire life in great detail. That sounds like just a lot more work for game devs.
Yeah, but NPCs could still accidentally reveal information you're not yet supposed to know about. 

But in any case, I want to ask an NPC about their craft. Just sit around all day talking to a farmer about the difficulties of raising crops or livestock. 

Imagine playing Skyrim Re-Re-Re-Remastered, and getting Farengar to do your math homework. 

Now that I think about it, I'd also like to talk the various town guards into carrying staves with Restoration spells.
I can run Vicuna locally and it does provide this type of data, not as good as ChatGPT but 90% there, and it takes about 5 seconds to answer. I'm running it with a 3080 for free (other than the power consumption ofc). Also people tend to think you are going to need a full different thread or LLM for each NPC and that's not the case. You can swap context to the one same model and generate on demand, so most likely a smart combination of 2-3 threads + regular code can handle most things. This means that we are not even 1 year away from solving this in real time locally with a single high end GPU.
Thank god somebody mentioned this.

You can even see in this demo, that there are cuts right before the monk answers. It's fascinating, sure, but if he left in the parts where ChatGPT was generating an answer there would have been awkward silences. Even 10 seconds would throw people off.

So the technology is there, but at the current state it breaks immersion. Maybe in a few years - decades it will be possible, but if it would be financially feasable that's another question.
Yeah that would be the challenge, maybe a game studio would get it on a local server of their own in a realy restricted version, but would still be expensive especially for large games like gta
They could always implement it with a failover to traditional techniques. Not to mention next gen consoles will have purpose built ASICs (hardware accelerators) to handle the processing. I'd give it a couple years at most.
Idk about the movement think.  If you could use LLM based on predictability why wouldn’t that work for human movement?  I’m sure there is enough recorded video to feed a similar system to predict human movement.
Technically a role reversal, I guess. If the character in front of you appears intelligent, then it's probably an AI. If it is dumb as a rock, then it's a real person.
 Bots aren't very good at avoiding behaviors that are seen as vindictive or hostile - which is why they have to keep adding rails to chat bots.
[deleted]
I present to you: Natural stupidity
Good bot
Lol yeah
Many people are using koboldAI for campaign story gen.
Definitely there will be a bunch of people feeling the same as you in the future
as if you won't have plenty of that forever
It's pretty groundbreaking that you can use ChatGPT to write your comments lol
I stopped reading when I need to scroll just to read your long ass paragraph
It's a rather goofy movie with a few cringy scenes. Otherwise it's pretty entertaining when you don't know what else to watch
We all care about the AI's storyline. Barely anyone cares about yours or mine.
Exactly!   It’s right around the corner!
That’s very optimistic. I’d be surprised if Im still alive by the time they tease gta7
And what they did to RDO was one of the biggest let downs, it had so much potential and they just abandoned it.
More like: " how about a Fireball with some light fus roh fuck you on the Side?"
Very well, shall I also prepare the chamberpots as well?
AND THEN WE GIVE THEM NUKES!
More storage intensive than high quality textures? 😁 I think that storage should not be a limiting factor in today's gaming and I could even imagine having parts of the game like this, that are not latency critical, put into the cloud.

With NPCs like you are describing them, gaming worlds could become do much more immersive.

Might be cool for the metaverse as well.
Yes and no. Large language models are pre-trained on large amounts of data that is correct and you need way more data than even a big development team could ever write on their own. But there is a thing commonly done called fine-tuning, where you take a language model pre-trained on a large corpus of general text and then adapt it to your specific problem where you have a lot less data available. The general idea is that the model keeps grammatical structure that it learned on the original task and then adapts that to your task at hand. The issue is that you do not really have complete control over this fine-tuning, so it can be hard to make the model forget some real world things it learnt previously but should not know, for example you probably do not want your fantasy game city guard to know the life history of trump or have an understanding of astrophysics. But maybe you can get around this by only allowing the player to choose from a given set of questions as is done in current video games instead of giving them complete freedom of what they can say, for example via voice input or via text. Also, you would need to fine-tune such a model for different characters in the game world with different knowledge, for example, a farmer should not have the same understanding of the world that some highly educated wizard has, which can quickly become very expensive. I think all of those problems are solvable, right now those ai's are anyway way to expensive to run on consumer-level GPUs, especially when you also have to render the game world and once we get to a point where it's plausible to run this on consumer-grade hardware, we might have figured out the fine-tuning too.
> Yeah, but NPCs could still accidentally reveal information you're not yet supposed to know about.

How? If they don't know it, how would they reveal it?
decades?  Where have you been for the last few months?

edit: brings to mind the time I talked to an Atari salesman and asked if it was possible to store photographs on a computer.  He flatly told me it would never be possible because of the insane amount of memory it would consume to store even one image.
[deleted]
I suspect this is in part because he waits for the full reply before doing text to speech. If you can implement streamed processing, you'll have much smaller delays.
Definitely not decades, but I imagine in a few years we can get something like real-time conversation with a high quality synth voice. We are going to need an order of magnitude more data centers for the compute.
This doesn't translate to VR though. You need embodied AGI to get perfectly convincing NPCs in VR, as that NPC needs to be indistinguishable from a real human in a social situation, including the tiniest details like random itching, biting their lip, nervousness body sway etc.
That could be especially fun in an open world game haha

Imagine bandits that are yelling improvised insults at you and with improvised personalities
It’s called morale compass. Basically.
Values.
 Humans are able to self generate interactions with others, AI requires extensive training to get the basics and then requires humans having to jump in as the chatbot starts to sexually harass / become nazi or other rather undesirable traits.
It's a language synthesis model. It has no real comprehension of what it's saying in the way that a human does. It's fundamentally different to what we do, on a cognitive level.  
Check out the ["Chinese Room"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chinese_room) idea
Lmao thx
Im sure It's common to feel that everything may be generated by AI, and believing that even comments or any content could be machine-generated may reflect a sense of insecurity and uncertainty.. Now you know how your grandparents may have felt🧓👵🕰️.
Then dont 😊
Oh.

Thats.. depressing
Well we won't give them to ghandi we know how that plays out.
Fallout 7: stop the mad and rogue all controling ai from nuking the rest of Humankind from the face of the earth.

Starring: 

-you

-a Mad and rogue ai that wants to nuke Humankind from the face of the earth

-dogmeat
If we actually hardcode graphic textures they can take up much less storage space, and can be easier to call. It's just that right now game engines go with the more convenient solution. We slap some textures on polygons and make them do a bunch of trigonometry and post processing. I see no technical reason we can't bake a lot of that into games so that a lot of the work is more akin to going to a lookup table, instead of raw dogging everything and reprocessing it everytime like we do.

An example of this is the game roller coaster tycoon. Where the entire game file takes up less data than a single screenshot. Of course it was programed by a madman with assembly, which is like one step from machine code.

Now having a central server is a little problematic in that it will always have a delay. Meaning chaining several ai events to get a better response will be slow.
If it is information they do know, but aren't supposed to reveal just yet, or maybe not at all.
>He flatly told me it would never be possible because of the insane amount of memory it would consume to store even one image.

He was wrong even at the time he said it. The first [colored digital photo](https://www.bbc.com/news/science-environment-38815948) was taken in 1972 (and put on the cover of Electronics Magazine.) Atari wasn't released until 1977.
There's already models that you can run locally that are quite good for chatting with.   They don't know as much as chatgpt but they are rapidly improving.  for generic conversation/small chat they're excellent.   Resource wise they run slow when running on CPU only but are quite good on GPU.   The only issue is they are 10-20gb in size but that's not an insane addition to todays games.   I doubt it will be a year before we see a game with something like that integrated
You forget one minor detail - things go exponential really fast.

I see comments saying 'Imagine having this in a game like GTA5!'

According to the GTA5 wiki, [Los Santos](https://gta.fandom.com/wiki/Los_Santos_(HD_Universe\)) has a population of around 4 million. You as a player most likely will not even interact with 1% of them, but let's say we max out the possible AI controlled population of the whole game at that, so 40 000 agents.

According to Steam, GTA5 peaked at [360 000 active players](https://steamcharts.com/app/271590), so that's players playing the game all at the same time - and only on Steam, not counting other stores. Let's be generous and serve the average player count of a 100 000.

Not to break immersion, these agents not only need to interact, but with the help of some optimization *remember* the player if they interact often. Even if the average player meets and interacts with 100 agents, that's already around 100 000 000 agents memory that has to be stored on a central server. And I don't mean storing it for your convenience, but storing it for the AI solution to work when players are playing the game.

About the cost of each token, let's say each hour this average number of players are interacting with 50 agents on average (from having 2 lengthy discussions to having a shooting spree frenzy involving 100 agents). That's not a token, just an interaction, and tokens could be a single one, or like in the video above, 5-10, maybe more. Let's average 10 tokens per agent.

At 500 tokens per 100 thousand players with $0.002, we are looking at a cost of $100.000! And that's an hour!

I don't see a game company spending almost 2 and a half million dollars each day for AI controlled NPC-s on that scale any time soon.
 Which humans aren't able to articulate let alone create as a program, even ethics would be a bridge too far.
>AI requires extensive training to get the basics

This is what childhood is.

>and then requires humans having to jump in as the chatbot starts to sexually harass / become nazi or other rather undesirable traits.

...humans also require humans to jump in for the same reasons.
[deleted]
I'm not talking about how textures could be done better. I just want to know where your statement that such AI for NPCs could be storage intensive (I think you edited that part out) ranks compared what we are used from todays graphics implementations. I don't think that it will take up significant storage compared what players are used to.
Why should a developer let them know what they are not supposed to know? They were able to hide storyline details from us human players for ages, why would they fail to hide them from AI NPCs? Is this a real problem?
>photographs

I mean he did say "photographS" not "photograph". So I imagine the salesman was thinking hundreds of photos and not just one or two.
[deleted]
>You forget one minor detail - things go exponential really fast.

You forgot one minor detail - so does the march of technological progress.

You're extrapolating based on using a cloud based *general purpose AI* for a specific task.

That's all that is availible right now, but that doesn't make a tailored solution running on a users hardware impossible or even impractical.

Sure it might mean installing a second graphics card just to run the AI without tanking the framerate, but there is no reason a cut to purpose AI can't be distributed given economic incentive (Which clearly, exists in spades)
[deleted]
I mean it can be done like a subscription type. As chatgpt needs internet. So they can be like pay monthly this much to get online subscription. I know this is gonna be worst move in gaming industry [ pay to interact lol 😆]
Which may force is to, after all technical advancements, start to value humanities and philosophy even more. And look for advancements there with more interest.
The AI is just a language model. It doesn’t know anything aside from the probability of the next word in a sentence.

If you ask it “what’s the tallest mountain in the world?” It could answer something like “the tallest mountain in the world is Mount Everest” but it doesn’t know what a mountain is or what it means to be the tallest. It just knows that the words have a connection because they have a high probability of being strung together in that order because it’s seen those words in a similar order before.

To put it simply the AI doesn’t understand what words mean, just how likely they are to be next based on its previous input.
AI don't function like children and if they had to train as long as humans, they wouldn't be worth pursuing.

 Further, as humans are social creatures by nature, there is less need for other's to step in, except in extreme cases - AI need constant monitoring.
 Would be nice, but you can't trust AI to regulate itself or others, as it doesn't have the capacity to do so..
r/fuckthes
Yeah what I'm saying is to reduce graphics storage/processing to free up resources to just run local AIs.
It's not about them knowing information they're not supposed to know. Quite the opposite, in fact: It's information the AI needs to know in order to portray the character properly, but the player isn't supposed to know. 

Look at Skyrim, for example. One character in the Thief's Guild has the Skeleton Key, and is responsible for some shady stuff going down. 

You do not actually learn that from the character himself, but from someone else, who he framed for the stuff he did. 

The character knows he has the Skeleton Key, since it's in his inventory and he uses it, but he doesn't tell you that he has it.
vicuna and pygmalion are pretty impressive for not smart but believable small talk.
The 4k context you send every time also costs money though. For every line if dialogue you need to generate you're going to need to send that 4k context so the NPC feels real and seems like it remembers previous conversations or just knows what it was just talking about. So for every 100 tokens generated you're actually looking at 40x the cost in terms of the context needed to generate those 100 tokens.
 Or more realistically, create AI of a more limited capacity and provide a means to audit the behavioral decisions.
Wouldn't it be like with real people: they know that they should not reveal it but depending on their character, a sufficiently pushy player could make them reveal it? Or provoke other reactions (like being killed in an outburst of fury). This already exists in scripted form, but having a more dynamic AI behind it would add some spice :-)
Yeah, pretty much. But that's kinda the problem, to be honest. 

Imagine, for example, in Skyrim, telling that guy from the Thief's Guild that you, as Dragonborn, can sense the Deadric energy coming from the Skeleton Key in his pocket, and your speech skill actually is high enough to convince him, or you present him with facts that he can't weasel his way out of.
I’m not sure how anyone could defend this but what the OP is doing is a very normal thing to do in a game. Hold an angle behind cover. AI with instant head eyes reaction after a sprint is just bad AI.
Don't you know you gotta follow a guide to perfection to deal with the rouges and not make a single mistake /s
This rogue had not engaged me from here before. He shot me at the front entrance and after rotating left to this position, he tracked me the whole time and instantly kills me.
If only BSG would install the SAIN mod on their servers.
BSG: we dont like the fact people can farm the rogues and bosses so we made them ridiculous hard

\*Makes it so there is only 1 viable way to kill any boss\*
Let me guess
M855 head eye
Honestly give me double the amount of ai that spray on me but turn their aim shit and i would have a blast
nikita accidentally balanced AI around players with esp/aimbot uh ohh 😯
Worst AI in modern games fr fr 💀
It’s not just the AI that’s ruining the events, I must of died 15 times on shoreline trying to kill 1 goon, half of those deaths felt like a cheater, instantly knew my position, instant head eyes
spt players living the dream with custom ai and event features
If the cheaters don’t get you the net code will.  If the net code doesn’t get you the audio will.  If the audio doesn’t get you then the AI will. 

There are a lot of things that work against this game being consistently fun and it makes me sad because I want to enjoy this game the way I once did but it doesn’t look like it’s in the cards any time soon.  Maybe in a few years.
It's true. Cheaters never made me actually quit a wipe, but the 3rd ridiculous death to Killa or Sanitair - after farming their maps for an entire weekend - just breaks my spirit beyond repair. 

This wipe the rogues broke me because they had to dial up the fuck you for no reason
Yeah - not only do the AI fire double bullets, they basically cheat - this is in the absence of BSG being able to develop any type of smart AI.

I'm all for the odd AI scav being cracked and doming me - that's more in line with what you can expect from other players - but having bosses that basically cheat isn't fun or challenging, it's just bullshit.  If the only reliable way to fight them is to lean through a slot in a door and shoot them with penetrating ammo - shit's broken.  It's the reason I haven't once loaded into lighthouse this wipe, and generally why I avoid a lot of the quests, because it's not worth the frustration of the game effectively cheating and the developers backing that up with 'it's supposed to be hard'.

Back when I would do the quests, the amount of time I'd spend blasting Sanitar in the head with ammunition that would render his head a hollow stump on a neck at best only to have him stand there because 'he's on drugs' and destroy me is why I don't really give a shit about a lot of the main quest line because in the absence of proper game dev, the game just cheats and turns what should be a challenge into a situation of RNG.
I dont even know why they bother banning cheaters if they just let the ai be in the game like this.
Started playing recently and hoooly shit the AI is absolutely cracked now. I'm level 20 and getting 10 deaths in a row. I'm staying to night time raids from now on and full rat mode.
I think that first shot ricocheted.  Double whammy.
maximum cheese was not employed
Does the AI de aggro? Because they track you through objects and bullets are whizzing by. Or you gotta run like 200m+ away from them to de aggro?
If you got killed like that and it was a player not an AI you'd 100% call hacks shows how broken they are lmao
The ai in this game is broken. Don't try to fight it "normally".
If you're spotted by a raider or rogue, fuck off for a while and come back. 

Otherwise they will do this. They've been doing it since they were added to the game, and will continue to do so. 

It's just one of those Tarkov things and imo won't be changing anytime soon.
The sub is filled daily with video proof of horrible, horrible AI. Has it even been acknowledged by the devs? Why isn't it top priority along with desync?
I’ve missed this game. Thank you for bringing me back to reality before I pick it up again!
Ai is horrible hopefully they can make some changes soon
Wont ever be fixed my man :) gotta learn to deal with the shitty game design
Do we prefer a John wick ai? No

What ai do we want? Stormtrooper ai xD
Other than not following the "guide" or "rules" to dealing with them, you ain't even do anything wrong lmao. It's tragic
Fucking ridiculous that we have to deal with hackers and aimbotting AI.
honestly man, it pisses me off that AI is almost perfectly accurate while side strafing. If players try that, their PMC swings his gun to the side slow as hell and the sights go off by a mile. If a scav does that, they can reliably hit shows at 30 meters. Complete bullshit.

AI rework can't come fast enough.
Yeah shoreline event is atrocious because the AI is ridiculous
Pvp ruins the game and the events :). I dont see fucking ai rats hiding with flirs on each corner possible. Oh wait, I see them, they called cultists
agreed
I don't even bother going there at daytime
this is why i bailed on this shitshow lol
you just got rolled bro
HOW IS THIS BAD AI YOU PEOPLE ARE SO THICK
Yerp you just learned never to pvp ai with corner peaks. Let them rush you in a room and hip fire their face. Or nade them and get them as they move.
I get that AI is bad but you can’t expect ex PMCs to miss as much as a drunk hobo
Skill issue
Git gud
the ai will never be good so get used to it
Yea this isn’t great but you guys act like there’s EVER been “good” AI in a multiplayer FPS game lol. It does not exist. 

You really think tarkov will be the game to revolutionize AI? You’re not some genius for thinking this AI isn’t “fair” it’s obvious. But i would rather them be stupid hard than easy like every other AI in existence. Makes the game fun. I can see how your average dad with 100 hours would hate this, but just don’t engage bosses when you know they’re there if you can’t kill them properly.
Be better
"How dare they make Tarkov hard I wanna feel powerful like in easy games grrrr"
Git gud
Well you are trying to do the task during the day so whee we t did you expect
Have you tried upgrading your gamer chair?
i mean a player could have done the same to you idk this clip is not even bad
What events?
Goons are terrible for the random 480 noscope
i haven’t been on in a while so i’m out of the loop, what event (if any) is going on? i heard we’re close to wipe, or is everyone joking still? i know a roadmap was dropped not too long ago when i still had twitter
Yea I got wallbanged by them behind the blue fence. I was in complete cover. They headshotted me through it. It's annoying they are so broken.
Yeah I was wondering why everytime I heard a scav say a voice line I immediately get 1 tapped…
I've had AI just stand and stare at a wall while I just walked up to them and other times get sit in my stomach thru a bush multiple times
get a better gaming chair bro
First time playing Tarkov ?
I gotta love the fact when rouges dont one tap you in the head instantly their 5.56 fmj magically goes through my fucking hexgrid in 2 shots
The bosses, rouges and raiders all need tuning down, these “special tactics” people preach aren’t intentional game design it’s a work around a broken system. “Just flash bang Killa and he will run out” that shouldn’t be the only strat because it’s the only way to avoid his laser beam aim. Give him more health and make him charge you or take up a defensive position, don’t just making him an aim bot to anyone he see’s. Only time my friend has killed him was when he barrel stuffed himself in a doorway and before that he nearly killed me in half a second. The bosses used to be fun but now they are just irritating. I’ve had the goons shoot me from weather station all the way out past the radio tower, now that would be understandable if it was just Bird Eye doing it, but having grenade launcher rounds land near by and being full auto sprayed is just not fun.
"working as intended" - nikita, probably
I’ve really never have issues with Ai it players more for me
Don't you just love how hardcore this game is 🤓
Bird eye on shoreline is so broken, BSG is so incompetent they can’t even do the most basic things right. It is truly astonishing…
Lighthouse has consistently been my worst experience with the AI. It’s either rogues shooting from 400m away or regular scavs one tapping me through layers of brush with no line of sight, which is a consistent issue I’ve found across every map but lighthouse seems for frequent.
From my understanding of the AI. Once you agro them from an angle, they are hyper fixated in that line of sight for roughly 10-15 seconds.

Similar to how we "slice the pie" ingame. You held a GOOD position, but because they were still fixated on that spot from what I can only assume is a prior peek not shown in the video. They were already pre-aimed and when your pixel registered for the Ai... *Head, eyes*
My boi ran you down like he was listening to freebird and it just hit the Guitar solo.
Imagine if the ai was 75% as good as division… it’s not the #1 issue with the game but it’s easily top 5… in a game with bosses and harder ai that drops actual cool loot but the fights with them are just so bad.
I catch myself  standing in one spot shooting  for to long  all the time. I'm not saying that's what happened.  You got tarkoved just pop one or two shots sometimes  and move quickly  repositioning  a lot wins me a lot of fights. For anyone  new sound is op in tarkov  but u can sneak around more then u think  there are a lot of sounds that you hear as loud  but other player's can't hear.  Good luck  everyone  wipe is almost here.
At least you saw him.  They’ve been beaming me through the wooden fence
Full speed sideways strafe head eyes while getting shot. Yep as realistic as playable.
Or don't be trash 🗑️
“Experienced and combat trained personnel”
Whats new
So what now, bot games are harder then human games?
Get good
It’s just stupid. But the fanboys will find a way to defend it
"Skill issue"
What you don't have fun getting insta aimbotted by rogues and turbo scavs? 

First time I played lighthouse me and my buddy ran into one of the lodged on the beach, looted a sports bag and instantly the automatic grenade launcher scav from like 4-5 hundred meters away or however far slams a grenade right through the window killing us both.

It's not fun dying to cheating AI it's just a frustrating waste of time.
On Shoreline, Birdeye shot one shot me on first shot from cottages while I was standing at tunnel…. So apparently AI can shoot/see me halfway across the map. I never went near cottages, never fired at goons, and this shit happens. Makes me not wanna play the game
Escape from tha 💩 tarkov.
The inconsistent AI is the worst part. I can fuck around in the open by a scav or boss, n they do nothing but miss

I hold an angle and they instantly head eyes me every time
The rouges are too powerful man
I havent played in a month what events are people talking about?
No what ruins the events is putting shit In labs where every time I go in I die to a cheater
Agreed. Ai way way overtuned
What's the problem? This is just normal Tarkov gameplay.
players do the same thing
Damn
SPT for the win
When a player does this, it is considered what? Outplayed?
The safer thing to do is not hold the angle but stay behind cover and jiggle peak once the AI has moved into position then shoot.. it’s not rocket science.
On lighthouse its fucking stupid but yeah you gotta follow the guide
How are people STILL typing rouge instead of rogue holy shit
We should have developers of the game do it and if they can’t get it in a singular try and extract  this should be changed. Thoughts?
So why didn't you just run up the side fence and heal behind the container whilst letting him deaggro? I have no idea why you're trying to ego peak an AI that's aggro'd and pushing you through bushes whilst both your arms are blacked, deserved death TBH.
Its not like its hard too, i mean unpaid dudes doing that in their free time did it, why not a game company?
what does the SAIN mod do?
Out of ignorance.. what is that one way? Doors?
Blacked via arms
5.56 FMJ head, eyes for me. I shot a rogue 3 times in the back before he instant 360’d me with head eyes smh.
Exactly. AI should mainly be there to alert players to your position.
Actually that kinda adds up.. if a player has ESP and is gonna cheese a boss or AI… fuck it level the playing field and pray the cheater gets smoked fast AF lol.. I’d love that
please share the list of multiplayer fps with good AI, I'd like to play it.
There are def a lot of cheaters still idk how it could even be debated
Doing those shoreline terra group task were helllllll, with the cheaters.
Bro 15? I swear I died twice that for the goddamn goon kill… because so many fucking players were killing ME instead of the goons like BRO JUST LET ME LIVE I DONT EVEN SEE YOU RN I JUST NEED THE KILL 😭
Hahaha I got it done in 2 tries only reason I needed a second attempt is bc they were already dead the first time I showed up. There’s cheaters but it’s not every raid I promise you that
It's not cheaters dude it's just late wipe so everyone has thermals. I have 10 flir 5 repair in my stash and I only play on weekends
You know we are, i got a mod where ai is not capable of seeing through bushes and recoil is actually existent to the rouges and scav bosses and basically every prewipe event that adds extra ai(Totaly not trying to get people to use spt)
> Maybe in a few years.

I thought that in 2017 and come back regularly, but there is no point having hope, you will only get frustrated.   
The game is stuck in eternal development, because the management is either absolutely incompetent or just doesn't care anymore, since coasting on marketing during this FPS market drought is good enough.
NEVERMIND, I got insta prefired twice by a cheater oh boy this game :DD
not cracked, just bad.
AI isnt that cracked.. Just don't look at htem for more than a few seconds.
If you are fighting the goons they dont once they see you they can see you throughout the rest of the raid even through walls even while like 300 meters away and for most ai it takes like 5-10 mins or you gotta be shooting them from like 300m away
Ikr
Agree, it's crazy how many people have skill issue. AI in EFT is the same for a long time, such a strange thing to be amazed by that every time. Just play the game, learn how AI works and play around it. What do these people want, stormtroopers? 

Sometimes you are not the protagonist. I got headeyesed by a rogue with M4 from 300 meter away on lighthouse, why would I come to reddit to cry if it's a common thing
Only reason I follow this sub anymore. Every time I feel like jumping back into the game, I come to this sub for 10-15 minutes and that feeling fades almost immediately.
They changed the scavs, did absolutely nothing
Bsg: “we dont like how people are farming the rouges for high tier loot so lets make it where you get killed unless you follow a specific YouTube video and have the rouges not spawn with anything above 5.56 so farming them is pointless and lets have it to where you have to clear this camp to get to half of your quests”
Nikita said multiple times that its because they are “highly trained operators” like dude so are our pmcs, we are quite literally the same
^[Sokka-Haiku](https://www.reddit.com/user/SokkaHaikuBot/comments/153gt2c/what_is_a_sokka_haiku/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=web2x&context=3) ^by ^arkadiiiiii:

*Yeah shoreline event*

*Is atrocious because the*

*AI is ridiculous*

---
^Remember ^that ^one ^time ^Sokka ^accidentally ^used ^an ^extra ^syllable ^in ^that ^Haiku ^Battle ^in ^Ba ^Sing ^Se? ^That ^was ^a ^Sokka ^Haiku ^and ^you ^just ^made ^one.
Naked scav eyes are already flirs.
This shouldn't be something you should have to fucking learn or adapt to, the AI should just not be dogshit and literally cheating — OP did nothing wrong.
Pvp ai?
"Properly"

He held a good angle and got shots on target. This is literally text book properly and the stupid gamey cheesy shit way to kill AI shouldn't be "proper".
its not hard. it's just that you have to cheese everything past ai scavs. That's not fun, it's poor, lazy design.
Why should players have to follow very specific guidelines for this shit exactly ?
Even at night it's not much better, you can still get cracked by big pipes MCX from 300m.
Whenever in game events happen there’s usually ai and most if the time said ai as good enough aim to split a hair in half from 500 meters away at full auto
Wipe is happening within august(prolly late august)

Current event has you go to shoreline and have you do things for fence about collecting something (i think a stim of some kind)from a scav that was working for fence and got ambushed by lightkeeper on his way back and if you do the quest you expand your stash(it could be permanently) and you can unlock lightkeeper instead of completing every quest in the game. 

This is the 4th prewipe event we have had and its full of lore if ur into that part of the game, also whenever a prewipe event ends another one begins

And the roadmap just shows future plans for the game but doesn’t tell us dates, all it says what they are working on
Dude if i see a scav flip me off, go prone, or say a specific voiceline, i get one tapped by magnum buck from 50 meters away
when player does that, its skill. Because we are not calculated artificial intelligence, it requires fair amount of luck as well.
No, usually its desync  lol
Exactly so the ai outplayed them
The point is that it shouldn’t be the norm for this game homie
Jiggle peak is not a solution it’s just abusing an already busted AI. This should not be the case to attack AI. 

Bobblehead PMCs is not the answer. It’s not rocket science.
Thats not how a game should work.

Its completely counter intuitive. Abusing a dogshit AI is not gameplay.

He held a corner and waited for the target to walk into his line of fire and died instantly.
How can you actually defend the AI when the ONLY way to kill it is to abuse the in game mechanics in unintended ways? The AI is supposed to simulate real people but the way you fight them is in no way similar to how you would fight real people.
I’ve found night time to be way more pleasant, bots have reduced sight, far less likely to get domed 200 meters away because a gunner saw your one pixel peeking around a corner
Its red it after all...
Don't worry, it'll be rouge soon. Same as aluminium became aluminum
They don't play the game there's my thoughts.
Ego peak? What? Dude, I'm holding an angle on something that should be looking straight forward and not tracking me perfectly through a wall. I never shot him or saw him from that angle prior to getting killed, so what are you on about? You actually want to know how he blacked my arms?! He spotted and agroed me THROUGH THE TENT WITH THE BTR UNDER IT! NOT OVER NOT UNDER, THROUGH THE TENT, NO LOS AND HE SHOT MY ARMS OFF! But yeah its just a skill issue, like my goodness you braindead idiot, what is wrong with you?!
God you're so arrogant it hurts
"YoU sHoUlD Do A 360 NoScOpE DeAgGrO It WaS oBvIoUs Ai WoUlD KiLl YoU DeSeRvEd" 🤓   


lmao imagine defending shitty game mechanic because you are used to it
OP is pointing out that it’s un-fun that the AI enemies with almost twice as much HP as player characters & an ability to fire 3 bullets at once with pinpoint accuracy at enemies who’ve changed position can do so while strafing, pointfiring, and being shot. Of course there’s a way to run behind something and sit there for 90s until the robot forgets you were ever there and you start over, but is it too much to ask that the AI could just fuckin’ work? 

Sure, programming AI is hard, but reducing their health pools to be equal with players or perhaps EVER fixing the three-bullets-per-trigger-pull bug would be a good start. 

The AI in this game is one of the worst things about it, only navigable by following some mumbling dumbfuck’s YouTube guide on exactly where & how to cheese each particular Rogue/Boss on any given map, and BSG insists on adding more and more of these half-baked raid-enders -all the time.
The choices made by OP doesn’t justify AI being able to 100% accuracy a previously unknown player whilst strafing
Why are you acting like AI should be able to instantly head eyes someone ????
Go back to snorting pills degenerate.
has a flipping grizzly too
Stop defending shit programming. Just stop.
because they drink vodka with orange juice during their working time, they also showed that on stream.
Makes the AI play more like real people. Let's use this video as a baseline. With SAIN that AI would have had a random "personality" assigned to it. 

With a more aggressive personality he'd have his Nikes laced up ready to bum rush you. He would probably run up a bit closer and lean-peek you. Hell, they could even jump from around the corner after you. Ever seen an AI jump?

With a more passive personality it would have either waited for a chance to ambush you, waiting for you to get close before either blind-firing your direction or be pre-emptively holding the angle in cover. or just straight up ran away.

Truly anything is better than AI walking toward you sideways and insta headshotting you. But kicking you in the balls is just BSG's style.
Makes the game better. Still not perfect though. Just general ai improvements.
Sniping them from far away, right hand peeking specific angles, doors when inside. That's about it. 

Any regular 1v1 is a death sentence unles you legit hit a god tier first bullet headshot.
There’s a couple ways but they’re all really “cheese” strategies. Usually throwing a base near them will trigger a sprint and a voice line, and while they sprint they’re basically incapable of fighting. Other strat is doors, or holding crazy angles.
Nah look at his health top corner. When you are hit in blacked limb you can see the whole body turning red and more red with every bullet until you are dead
Im totally fine with them being a legitimate threat, just... not via aimbot.
Yep, Hunt Showdown does this very well and it works great.
They should just be there imho. No guns or anything, just be there.
Division 2 AI was actually decent for being a multiplayer game tbh.
S.T.A.L.K.E.R AI has pretty good moments.   


But besides those good moments, they'll sit at a campfire and eat 3 headshots while continuing to play their guitar.
Bad AI because it is too weak >>> Bad AI because it is too strong in a multiplayer game. There are always other players to present a serious threat, no game needs random autodeaths
SPT (Single player tarkov) paired with the SAIN mod makes AI actually fair
Most modern games have good AI, honestly. The thing about good AI is that you don't notice it until it's not there.
Yeah it’s got to be around 15, an issue with the skills for sure, fighting them in the daylight is ridiculous and my night raids were packed with players with thermals. I have one of those DSF flares so I’m going to try and assemble a small team and try and do it that way.
Weirdly I killed big pipe and bird eye on my first try but it didn’t count because I hadn’t completed the first part of the quest where you have to get close to the cottages. I got 50 million to spend so I’m just going to keep going.
You need to see "Goats" video if you don't believe it's cheaters.
Sounds like you’re joking but I legitimately have 5-6 FLIRs and have killed several people around cottage with them already. It definitely feels like hacking when you have an absurd vision advantage.

Number of FLIRs also doesn’t matter when you can straight up buy them from jaeger.
What are those two mods called?
name of mods?
loved the 3.6.0 update with gift codes, and I genuinely can't wait to mod some into the game
How difficult is it to fight scavs relative to normal Tarkov?
Oh, don't get me wrong, I have no hope anymore.  My last ember of hope was snuffed out during the Halloween event 2 years ago?  I think it was 2 years ago.  Remember the "be online!  amazing things are going to happen!!"  Then we're all sitting there for an hour, waiting, when eventually the "big event" takes place, day turns to night, it gets foggier so sniping is 100% off the table and scavs have pumpkin heads again.  Then there were some mutterings about how more was planned blah blah blah.  It's at that moment that I thought to myself that I have to let go of caring about the fate of Tarkov.  If it gets fixed, great, I'll happily play again.  If it doesn't?  Well, we'll just get more clown shows like Streets.  The most hyped FPS map of all time that landed with a wet flop.  Unplayable to almost everyone, rubber banding that the Michelin Man would be envious of, huge buildings with 3 rooms each that you can enter.  

It's all just.... whatever... I don't even know.  When you have devs showing up to live streams drunk or high or both, then taking a break mid stream while freaking out because the demos are all going badly to have "juice time" (which they've made a special graphic for btw, who makes a special graphic for a break [who has breaks during live streams??] in a live stream to go drink more) you know that the wings are off the plane and they're just riding that metal tube into the ground.
Might not be cheaters right now, a lot of thermals at night
I was standing on the hill by the truck on shoreline to the left of resort.

The goons tried to beam me from cottage through trees about 500+m away while I was looking in the opposite direction of them. What was my mistake? Existing on the same map? Neither of us had line of sight.
Imagine defending the busted AI this hard.
Hahahaha don’t look at the enemy great one
Sorry people don’t understand sarcasm.
just hold your gun behind your head and kill them with a no-look shot 🙄
That sucks
except now they see straight through bushes and trees and from miles away. Shits straight up broken.
Good bot.
He meant don’t fight AI like you fight people. “You don’t PVP AI”.
So what would you fix here? The AI should not shoot? Or miss you? Or take longer to find him as a target? 

I’m what way exactly do you change the AI behavior in this scenario without making them too easy to kill?
Idk. The AI is dogshit busted, I agree, but as to why players SHOULD, you're sneaking into a defended military outpost of ex-USECS. Why shouldn't you have to be careful?
thanks big man. really appreciate it. fuck i may have to do that for phat stash expansion. i have eod, do we know if the expansion is still worth it?
They have human function so idk what you mean 🤷
The AI can consistently, near 100% of the time, beam you in the face with a shitty 40 durability trash mod AK, from any distance while moving. That’s not good AI. It’s not the AI outplaying us either, it’s replacing actually engaging AI with artificial difficulty of inhuman aim and reaction speeds.
What do you mean? The game is meant to be realistic clearly. I don't know about you but in my super classified navy seal airborne marine special forces training they taught us how to jigglepeak and bunny hop.
Not to mention he shot the ai first which would aimpunch players but ai doesn’t suffer from that so he just loses
The rogue was already agro'd from a previous peek not shown in the clip, was already fixated on that spot, and when the rogue pushed forward. It had essentially already had the Los lined up
bro at night time i was near the construction site and i have no clue how they saw me but the grenade launcher rogue obliterated me. i measured it, i think it was something like 231 metres. in nighttime.
Yeah, but you so much as pop a half chub IRL and every one of them in a mile radius can 360 no-scope you in the fucking retinas again.
Any time you take good quad NVGs and a 762 Nato gun to lighthouse, expect to be killed by a cheater.
Yeah i should bring in some flirs and see all what this is all about it you ahahsah wahdhf dg
Got shot trough a door crack yeasterday, head eyes. Fuck scopes iron sights for the win i guess
Rogue and rouge are two different words entirely, and are not exchangeable. Aluminum and aluminium are two different spellings, both correct and interchangeable.
[removed]
Where in any of what I said, did I defend BSG's coding? You completely illiterate 40iq child.

It's irrelevant how you think the games coding should work, it's been this way for years and the OP made an absolutely dogshit decision within the confines of how the game actually works.

Deserved. Downvote away, doesn't bother me in the slightest. OP played like shit and died.
[deleted]
You can think what you want about the AI and you could write a 140 page novella about the ways in which BSG could change it but that's all completely irrelevant.

This is how the AI works, this is how it's always worked, this is how it will continue to work. OP played like shit within the confines of the video game as it currently stands, regardless of how you think the game should work. 

If you need youtube guides to work out how to play the game that says it all. Try just actually playing and learning yourself instead of immediately seeking advice from others at the smallest sign of difficulty/challenge/uncertainty. 

Dying isn't a big deal in the slightest, learn from the mistake and adapt.
Yes but the ai also doesn't have guns lol. But that is the prise it should have.
Most modern shooters are either incredibly easy, have bullet sponge enemies, or rely on a streamlined trial-and-error system in single player or coop that allows you to retry the encounter within a few seconds of dying.

Completely different than Tarkov.
My man good shit
I have he doesn't use any kind of real statistical analysis, he's using a very small pool of anecdotal data and jumping to massive conclusions. I've played 4 wipes. My brother has Kappa. Between me and him we've got 9000 hours. We both have seen and or been killed by less than 10 blatant cheaters all wipe. That doesn't mean cheaters don't exist because that's just my anecdotal experience. But the idea that 60% of games have a cheater is patently absurd.


Yes cheaters are out there. But the ones that kill other players are almost ALWAYS blatantly cheating like they fly around the map etc. I've been killed by 3 blatant cheaters all wipe. 1 was named BanMePlz69 and literally was invisible and could fly. The other was a guy on factory who killed me after I had ratted silently in one spot for 15 minutes and he shot me through a wall. I added him and he asked if I wanted a carry that's how blatant he was. And both of them got banned. My brother has ran into 3-5 of the blatantly cheating flying guys and he has Kappa this wipe. 


The RMT chinese farmers that use hacks to farm for rmt play exclusively on west for the most part, and BSG's efforts to limit RMT have significantly hurt RMT.


Cheaters were a much bigger problem last wipe, and the wipe before that. There was so much RMT farming going on I know because I met cheaters through the official discord and they usually were using it to farm RMT or farm carrys.
the ai mod is called SAIN's
SAIN's for the ai
I just got prefired in a secluded corner in shoreline where the village is(not the sanitar one)while afk for like 15 mins watching a video and dude storms in doesnt check any corners besides the one im in and starts shooting before i even see his shoulder come around the corner
Well you seen, you used your third eye and you should have made it blind.
That is exactly what I was going for, good job. Yes, you did it.  wait
Have them not lock on for one thing, you can also adjust their accuracy, or time it takes to acquire target. Lots of things. The single player mod tarkov people have many mods that mess with ai and provide a MUCH better experience.
Sounds like you are lacking the AI skill
Yeah, I was an Arctic seal. It's kind of like navy seals but cooler and makes funny noises. We learned to take 5 stimulants and be drugged out all the time rubbing lip balm on my face and bunny hopping across door ways to peak my enemies
I know WHY it happened. 

Im saying it should not happen because its dogshit gameplay.
Rogue AI doesn’t get reduced vision as it gets darker. It is binary, they either have full vision or have their reduced night vision, nothing in between. 21:45 ￼— 05:00 they cannot see you at construction, you just werent there at what the rogues consider “night”.

Source: hundreds of nighthouse raids this wipe
I think they increased his range because I remember he didn't shoot unless you were closer to the beach last wipe but this wipe I've been killed close to the construction site by the grenade launcher.
Soon they won't be, don't worry
gotta love a 'realistic tactical shooter' where holding an angle against a sprinting opponent is 'F-' level play
You're full of it.

What the hell is an "ego peak" anyway?
They hated him because he was right
You mad
You probably got to level 30 and decided to become an expert
Honestly you have a fair point, the guide makers put in the work & without them you’d have no choice but to die to 1100HP laser aimbot AI again and again until you found whatever BS cheese works on them. I avoid AI bosses like the plague ‘cause I just don’t think they’re fun, but you’re right, somebody has to make those guides so that the content is more accessible.
The guy just said “it is how it is” lmao.    
Ima keep it real with you chief, it is completely irrelevant what **you** think about people complaining and giving feedback. On the contrary to yours “git gud”, the    
>140 page novella about the ways in which BSG could change it

Is very much relevant and valuable. If you didn’t notice yet we’re all here playing “closed” beta, and the first google search will tell you that *”Beta tests are used to identify any remaining bugs or usability issues and gather feedback on the overall user experience”*. So that feedback is very much needed. And if it’s too hard for you comprehend the idea of “giving feedback” or say anything besides “try actually playing”, then many people will kindly ask you to fuck right off as even the simplest “AI bad, pls fix” complaint brings more to the table than anything you wrote so far
yeah, if you need guides you should just go back and replay the tutorial
Timmies will downvote, but this death is deserved.
No, it's absolutely not different. Literally the only thing stopping Tarkov from being *exactly* what you described is the cranked up AI damage/aim and the multiplayer format.

> have bullet sponge enemies, or rely on a streamlined trial-and-error system

This is already the case though? Higher tier enemies difficulty comes entirely from arbitrarily buffed health pools and aim, plus the entire PVE gameplay loop is built around trial and error as you figure out how to exploit the AI.

None of this makes for good AI. It's just bandaids and artificial difficulty.
RMT is a subsection of cheaters but you have tons more people still offering carries, rage cheaters, and people who just cheat for the hell of it to get an advantage. Most people use radar but plenty of non-flying aimbotters as well.

Acting like the RMT changes cut cheating way down is just foolish and wrong.
> and literally was invisible and could fly.

If he was invisible, how did you know he was flying?
> Between me and him we've got 9000 hours. We both have seen and or been killed by less than 10 blatant cheaters all wipe.

haha
too many words... Sounds like cope
Bro typed a whole ESSAY like bro ain’t nobody got time to read all that shit!!
Okay, those are the blatant cheaters that are easy to detect and ban. How about all of the less obvious stuff, like ESP and radars? Or how about the people who selectively use aimbot?
I agree with both of you. It just needs some better fine tune accuracy. But a rogue should not be as easy as a scav. Did OP say they were already engaged prior? Big no no. If you get engaged you have to wait for them to deaggro or you will get fucked no matter what.
Much better but also much “easier” yea? The fixes you speak of, taking longer to acquire the target, not “locking on” and adjusting their accuracy AKA make them miss more shots. These are all things that make the AI just plain easier to defeat, which is not their goal and basically loot Piñatas. More fun for some but not for others… 

The idea, like most things in Tarkov, is much easier said than done. Actually making the AI more fun to fight but not compromising their difficulty is insanely hard to accomplish. Same argument as “Fix spawns we are too close!” It’s just so much easier on paper than realistically fixing. 

So you’re not wrong in saying it needs fixed… but you’re wrong for thinking it’s some easy issue with simple solutions like you named. Much more complicated.
You're absolutely correct. 

I'll take this advice and go about making sure I have the same capabilities as the AI. 

Anybody know how I can go about getting 0 weapon sway, 0 recoil, extrasensory perception so that I can track players through though solid objects on the other side of the map, and the ability to lock my aim to specific body parts?
Honestly the AI should have an idea of where is at if he was already aggro'd they just need to tune down their accuracy a tiny bit. Their's a mod for offline that does this wonderfully but I can't remember what it's called.
Oh, it plays terribly, no disputing that. For the time being, all we can do is cheese or flip a coin.

I did see on the updated roadmap for Ai improvements in the August wipe. So hopefully something comes of that
yeah probably was between like 19:00. still dark as piss but not nighttime apparently 😂
Ive seen people get grenade lauchered all the way at Informant’s beachhouse. Absolutely ridiculous
Why won't they be? What is your reasoning for thinking this?
Your mistake was in thinking that Tarkov is remotely realistic or a tactical shooter. It's a hardcore looter shooter filled with gameisms, the only thing it has in relation to real life is the gun parts/names.
ego peak is a very common term in fps games and is actually extremely self explanatory if you use your brain.
Guy who doesn't even know what an ego peak is tries to discuss nuances of an FPS game.

100% reddit.
Ikr the keyboard warrior over here lol
Fucking Cultists dude.. I’ve hunted Bloodhounds, Sanitar and his guards, Reshala and his Guards, and Shturman and his Guards but I’ll be fuckin damned if I could ever kill a fucking cultist. Impossible (pretty much) to see on thermals, they literally rat in the hardest to see places, run fucking fast, have night vision, are silent, and are as skilled as a Rogue or Bloodhound. Like FUCK cultists dude…
Yeah all us who played the game for years before there even existed a wiki or guides at all just gave up and didn't play till some lord and savior streamer came and saved us.

Critical thinking is dead. Long live blind obedience.
> Higher tier enemies difficulty comes entirely from arbitrarily buffed health pools

They're far from being bullet sponges, even a juiced up Sanitar will die in one hit from a shotgun.

> as you figure out how to exploit the AI.

But even once you figure out how to exploit it, a lot of the time you have to sort of tip-toe around the encounter while doing w/e is required for the cheese. All while other players are likely also trying to kill the boss. That's what leads to some of the most intense and hilarious moments in Tarkov.

It's not good AI, but it does drive players towards the type of game situations that are seemingly exactly what BSG wants. And it's fun, which is why we all keep coming back to the game wipe after wipe. I don't think Tarkov is a case either of being "fun *except* for the darn AI"! I think the jankiness and ridiculous threat levels that can come from the AI adds to the game in a weird way.
I agree . I think most people that cheat do it because they don't like losing.
Because we could see tracers flying from a spot in the sky at us following us through the air all the way down shoreline beach
>I can't read
How melted is your attention span that two paragraphs are too much for you to read? Fucking zoomers, man.
Reading words is indeed difficult
Who likes the way AI are right now? I'd rather it be too easy than be like it is now, you will always have players for difficulty as well 

And even then I really don't think it would be too easy. I'm a tarkov vet and have played alot of the game, got kappa etc. And even with that on the single player mod I still die and it still has some challenge.

Not to mention everything has just been nerfed and shit on to the point of being unfun. Raiders dropping shit ammo/shit gear/ shit broken guns. It wouldn't be as bad if tarkov didn't have such a dumb tiered system for effectiveness (like the realism mod) but it does.

I dunno. Just doesn't feel good all around
Hax, you're looking for hax.
if we're using piss as a darkness measurement perhaps a doctor's visit is in order
The earliest you want to start queuing up for nighthouse is 21:30, but if you have a quick load and a close spawn you can still get bonked by a rogue; so be careful there.
I got killed there just the other day
Your mistake is egocentric abuse of shared game knowledge.

You miss the point of this post. Bad AI is still bad AI - regardless of loophole mechanics.
an ego peek is putting yourself in a vulnerable situation where you know an enemy will probably be and engaging in a 50/50 duel. In CS "I'm gonna ego peek mid with an awp" is just busting out into the area and trying to snap onto a player and kill them, as opposed to working around the map playing angles and flanks.

Holding an angle behind cover on an AI is in no way an "ego peek" in any definition of the term.
Yes, the meaning is obvious.
I just don't like the term, especially when it's misused.
What an ego explaination lol
I love how 420prayit and 88vicodin spread their immense knowledge
>Guy who doesn't even know what an ego peak

Lol. It's a PEEK. You spelled it wrong like six times. An "ego peak" is nothing.
ahh, my favorite hiking spot, *Ego Peak*
I can surmise what it means, if that's what you're implying, I just don't see the applicability here.

Regardless though.
OP wasn't peaking, or " ego peaking" or whatever. He was holding an angle.
I don't need to be a Super CSGO Operator to tell the difference.

I reiterate my previous point.

You're full of it.
No. An ‘ego peek’ is you peeking heaven with AK when you know there’s an AWP there but want to try to get the kill anyways cuz he just domed two of your friends. Holding an angle in a tactical fps against AI is not an ‘ego peek’.
Bloodhounds are broken, too. I usually don't get killed by AI much since I cheese them and know the safe ways. But last night, my team spawned sunken on shoreline. Pushed up to go into the village to fight the goons. And I saw 4 things on thermal. I was almost 200m away, I believe. I went prone behind a big tree and right peaked and lined up a headshot. Before i could shoot I was dead.  9x19 PST.  Fucking pst from that far. 4 of them to the face
Im sorry life was so hard for you back in the day old timer

thanks for laying the ground work for all those guides so I didn’t have to waste tons of time figuring it out myself
Too many words again try harder bub
Ohhhhhhhh, ok. That makes sense.
He meant "dark ass piss" because when you piss from your ass its usually pretty dark.
> Regardless though. OP wasn't peaking, or " ego peaking" or whatever. He was holding an angle. I don't need to be a Super CSGO Operator to tell the difference.

This is correct in every community. Holding an angle is never considered an ego peek (or peak). Ego peeking would be what the AI did, running out unfavourable into someone holding an angle hopping to kill quick to survive. Then again that isn't even a peak but a full on run out lmao.
Only broken in the daytime. Nighttime at times they get sketchy for no reason but 90% of my experiences were eazy cheesing with a FLIR and medium range.
Thanks for being one of the guide following timmy's that are just a free kill every raid because they can't do a single thing for themselves except try and emulate what they see on youtube. 

Also I don't remember ever saying the game was hard at all but hey, you said it so it must be true, my mistake. I can see your reading comprehension skills are as adequate as your critical thinking ones, ignorance is bliss I suppose.
relax nerd
You are not a real person
I hope there are better days coming for you, buddy
F.E.A.R. introduced the GOAP (Goal Oriented Action Planning)  A.I. for smarter enemies and to this day still has some of the best A.I. and has even been used in the most recent Tomb Raider games, nearly 15 years later.

&#x200B;

Steam accually used a clever system in Half-Life 2 that made enemies more likly to attack you from the nearest ledge in order order for you to feel more like an action movie badass knocking people to their demise, good example of smarter not being better.
>I know about one example: Oblivion. What I heard is that each of the thousand NPC had their own needs and wants and that was what determining their routine for the day.

They ended up dumbing it down because they kept running in to problems.  One story often told is that one NPC's AI determined that it was time to rake the leaves, only the nearest rake was in the possession of another NPC.  So the AI determined the easiest way to get it was to *murder the NPC and take it from his corpse*.  Five minutes later the player wanders in and there's a dude raking leaves and a corpse in the corner, the player wondering what the hell just happened.

So they cut it down, as they couldn't get the priorities working correctly such that they wouldn't murder other friendly NPCs for items they needed.

That's the story, at least.  Not sure how true it is,
[removed]
if you want to talk about Oblivion: AI has day schedule that makes it look more alive and preferences in combat that makes it try to act more efficiently. by default, the latter isn't tuned very well, but there are several AI mods that does nothing but adjust already existing parameters to make combat AI much more dangerous.

i don't remember everything, but here's a list of things an AI can do in unmodded Oblivion and could do with some fixing: pick upserior weapon, switch between melee and ranged when appropriate, sidestep attacks, use consumable items whenever it thinks it is appropriate, retreat to survive or retreat to heal, look around for a player that managed to conseal themselves after combat, take better equipment from corpses, stay at a distance if it can't handle player in melee or not engage at all if it knows it can't win. the things it can't perform are any kind of team tactics and surprise attacks.

day schedule, on the other hand, already looks alright for the most part(some addons introduce schedule bugs for certain NPCs IIRC) - most sleep at night, work at day and relax at evening. some are also set to travel to their "friends" on certain days of the week or month. some activities are also set to change NPC's clothing, so, say, a knight won't be sleeping with their armor on or a guard won't have their torch out during the day hours.

the best part about all this is that AI doesn't have to be pointed to specific things it needs to interact with or use, althought it can be done when desired - NPCs can find free seats in a select tavern on their own, they can roam around forest freely looking for deers to hunt, they can find and steal food if they must eat and are ok with breaking the law.
To bring up something that isn't FEAR, Halo has some neat nuance to enemies throughout the series, like how if you get an elite down to low health, they may aggro and pull out their sword. Or, I think in Halo 2, if you kill all brutes in an area except for one (or was it just if you did enough damage to them?), the last one will go super crazy, throw their weapon away and run straight for you in a fit of blind rage. Or how Hunters will moan and attack far more aggressively when their partner is killed.

&#x200B;

And of course, there's the classic grunts running away in fear after their squad leader elite is killed. It's all of the stuff like that, that give them a lot of character. Heck, elites and brutes can even hijack your own vehicles just like you can to them. It gives off a feeling like they have the same capability as you.

&#x200B;

There's lots of other little stuff I'm sure I'm missing too, like suppressive fire, or the flood reanimating dead bodies in Halo 3. A lot of this stuff was probably inspired by Half-Life 1's AI too, which is like the granddaddy of this sort of thing.
No one is gonna mention ALife in the STALKER series? They actually had to tone it down for the release. 

But basically the AI would play their own choose-their-own-adventure game (with branching choices) and these were done on a small scale, on an event basis, not one long storyline. So NPCs would interact with the world and other NPCs and make choices in these events.

Not sure if that makes sense, but what this simple system resulted in, is a world were NPCs played the game along with you, so it all felt natural and it would organically create small subplots.

You could see a group of scavengers meet some military in a base, get in a fight, the winners would then scavenge the bodies for loot, then continue to their scavenging location, only to be met by some hungry mutant dogs there that were looking for food. They had to tone it down, because some NPCs might finish the storyline before the player did.

Edit: Dwarf Fortress is also a good one
That's really hard to say. Good AIs in games are not "good" AIs, but an AI made to look good.

Usually when players say an AI is good and then you hear the devs talk about it, it's just some clever scripts & stuff like that.

You could potentially make a super advanced AI that kinda thinks like an human etc. but in the end it's way "easier" to make something specific, usually for better results too. And of course you can't just train an AI to be good, because it'll be TOO good. In the end is more a question of balancing than making a "good" AI, so definitely not something limited by the technology.

Stealth game are often criticized for their "dumb" AIs for example, but it's not because good AI would be hard to make but because the game simple wouldn't be fun without rules and limitations to the AIs' capacities. And yeah, I'm sure players don't even notice the most advanced AIs.

&#x200B;

Check out this talk, I think it gives a good overview of the idea of AIs in games [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1xWg54mdQos](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1xWg54mdQos) 

&#x200B;

As for me, I really like systemic games, so any AI made to work that way is cool to me (like enemies picking up what's around them to fight with, stuff like that)
Sims is the obvious example here. They have complex behaviour patterns, but then again, the whole game's premise is based around it.

Black&White comes to mind. You can teach your creature and your subjects, and they all also spontaneously learn stuff.

The Fable series (yes, another Lionhead game) tried to implement an advanced AI to all the random NPCs, their preferences, etc., but it was a bit too simplistic. In the end, the end result wasn't in my opinion as nice as something you'd see in Gothic (where NPCs have set daily routines which is normal nowadays).

F.E.A.R.'s and Half-Life combat AI is excellent.

Can't think of anything else noteworthy. This vexes me.
Oblivion's NPCs didn't have AI, they had unique scripts. The actual AI was dumb as shit.

FEAR is a game which accidentally had good AI thanks to a small programming bug which made enemies very likely to flank you and otherwise engage with you. I'm not sure it counts if it's an accident, but in FEAR a lot of the enemy behavior is completely unscripted.

Metal Gear Solid as a series generally has some pretty good AI on the higher difficulty settings. MGS2/3 are especially notable for how good they are given the constraints of putting the AI into a PS2 game.

The problem with AI is not that we CAN'T make good AI, it's that making a good AI generally makes for a very un-fun game. Enemies are obstacles for the player to overcome, and an enemy which is smarter and more aware than the young/drunk/high/tired player at the end of their day is not a fun obstacle, it's an annoying one.
The thing about an AI that's smarter than a player, is it's pretty much indistinguishable from cheating.

What players really seem to want is predictable AI, so they can feel smart for being better than it. They want to know what the AI is "thinking", this is what FEAR did so well. Good communication with the player, and a play area designed to exploit it. Pretty much all stealth games have a way to tell the player they've been spotted, or are about to be spotted, as another example.
The most recent example that I think wow'd me are the imps from Doom 2016.  Specifically the ones that are tasked to run away and hide from the player and use ranged attacks.  I know it's just a trick, but it's a really good trick.

Also after listening to the ai design in the noclip documentary, I thought the token system was a clever idea.  Basically all the enemies share regenerating "attack tokens" which must be spent to attack the player.  In this way the rate of attack can be controlled and so the player isn't just overwhelmed.  And the enemies have their own little token marketplace in which they can trade tokens with one another to create more sensible and dramatic attack scenarios for the player.
The thing about "good" AI is that it is totally reliant on player perception. So AI doesn't have to actually be smart or dynamic, it just has to appear that way. It also needs to be fun.

I'm not aware of any game that doesn't have the classic "Oh I just saw a guy get shot in the face right beside me with an arrow. Oh, ten seconds have passed, I am now no longer worried about this dead man. Let me stand right next to where he died"

But think about how annoying it would be if AI were actually vigilant like a soldier in real life, or were actually perceptive like a human being. You'd be hard-pressed to do anything stealthily.

FEAR AI is always brought up because they made the enemies appear to be extremely smart, but in reality it's a bunch of "If this, then that" logic that is accompanied by the soldiers shouting and good level design based around their AI.

Like you mentioned, NPC's having daily routines rarely, if ever, is noticed by the player or affects them in a meaningful way. The type of AI you need is completely related to the type of game you're making.

An AI that had actual military tactical techniques and good aim would more than likely be overwhelming and un-fun for the player.

TBH I can't even think of the last time I was actually impressed with the AI in a game.
You should check out: 

\- Elizabeth from Bioshock Infinite for a compelling companion NPC,  the AI is an integral part of why she's a beloved game character;

\- the AI of Alien Isolation for an example of opponent AI. This game cheats, but does it in a way that keeps you entertained;

\- many people don't realize just how good this is, but FIFA's AI does a great job at moving the players that are not in direct control of a human; over the years, this stopped being a significant problem and plays look/feel more natural because of the improvements in how the AI understands plays in order to position players that are not on the ball - it's the kind of improvement that goes unnoticed because it's so subtle, but good enough not to break imersion anymore;

I think this discussion should cover strategy games more than RPGs, shooters, action games. The biggest improvements would have to be related to StarCraft 2 and it shows true evolution unlike most other games. First, there's the game's AI that allows the player to go against basic version of strategies they might encounter online. The ability to practice against this with the AI is basically unprecedented in other games. The AI is not that good overall, it's better than in any strategy game, but it has it's obvious limitations - hey, it still has to run on the same machine that has to run the game smoothly for the player too. Not an easy task and the game is complex enough to cover properly, it's very impressive what they've achieved. 

And then there's AlphaStar. Look, if you're really interested about the topic, you have to read or watch videos about what the DeepMind team did. We basically have an AI that can beat professional players in Starcraft 2. This is relevant as it explains to you why it was so difficult to advance as fast as it was expected 20 years ago, but it also shows that we now have the technology to create AIs that can execute top level tasks, at the same level as a human can. And while the training of that AI might require a large number of machines, the binary that you need for your playthroughs are not too demanding for a single machine to handle. I'm definitely seeing some interesting development because of what the AlphaStar team achieved.
I thought the AI in Doom (2016) was good...I saw some video on ít and it seemed really clever.... But I've never really payed attention to game design while playing
They movement in RAGE is great, not sure if that counts.

Tropico's citizens are pretty complex with likes/dislikes, specific jobs, specific homes, relationships, and allegiances.
This is hearsay from when I worked at Ubisoft. The bad guys in I think it was Rainbow Six Vegas has very complex human-like behavior AIs. However, once it was published, the players just saw "oh, a guy is over there shoot him" and they decided it wasn't worth investing in.
Persona 3. That game didn't let you manually control your party members, but the AI was pretty good and never fucked up to the point where I died. If I died it was because of my own mistake or that my levels/equipment/persona was too bad.
A lot of the problems with modern games are that they are server-based, which means even if they're not fully-fledged MMOs they're still bound by the technical limitations of the servers.

And we already know that advanced AI calculations are expensive, if we also now have a server-based game like, The Division, Destiny, Anthem or any of its ilk then you end up with similar AI limitations as MMOs.

So essentially because more and more devs decide to go Server-based we end up moving a little bit backwards in terms of AI-advancement and technology.

That said, it'll be interesting to see what Cloud-Gaming/Streaming will bring to the mix, if we can add everybodys computational power together somehow, it might be interesting to see what the future brings. :)
[removed]
I remember at the time it came out Far Cry (the first one) was known for it's clever AI. I found a nice video about it: [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=93bPTrlknIY](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=93bPTrlknIY)

At the time all of these things features were really impressive.
I think the best Ai would be Ai from CS 1.6 



But again it greatly depends on the map... for example if the map is dust 2 and the creators of the map are really skilled... the bots are really good
> Steam accually used a clever system in Half-Life 2 that made enemies more likly to attack you from the nearest ledge in order order for you to feel more like an action movie badass knocking people to their demise.

And thus, Dark Messiah of Might & Magic.
There's a paper written in 2006 about F.E.A.R IA: http://alumni.media.mit.edu/%7Ejorkin/gdc2006_orkin_jeff_fear.pdf
It’s not the first time I hear about F.E.A.R. as an example. It’s true that their AI seemed very good…

…except for the fact that they keep SCREAMING their position and what they’re going to do to the player.

(It’s a joke. I know it was done to make the game more fun. But still, it has always bugged me.)
Valve
One of my favourite things in Oblivion is that the guards had 95 aggression (on a scale of 1-100) but 100 responsibility. They were basically all extremely disciplined psycho murderers, and the way they behaved in game reflected it perfectly.
I love that story. I hope it's true
There's also another story of the devs finding the corpse of a prisoner that was not supposed to be dead in an open cell. They were trying to fix it when they noticed the prisoner was always murdered by the guards. It turns out, once the guards run out of food, they kill this poor fucker for his'.
Constantly impressed at how well that Alien worked in that game.
They also gave the alien some light learning capabilities. Or at least the illusion of such. Overusing the flamethrower could cause it to start to charge through the flames, it might pay less attention to noisemakers, etc
TIL
I loved the variability in Halo's enemies/AI, that's probably why I was able to play the campaigns so much before I had XBL. I know nothing about how advanced the AI actually was, but the devs did a great job at creating dynamic and reactive encounters.
Enemies in Stalker would even sneak behind you while you are busy fighting their friends.

They also looted bodies, helped their allies after combat, would hide in non-solid obstacles (like bushes).

@Edit

Zombies in CoP wouldn't attack you if you were just walking near them, but jogging (default movement) would alert them.
The crazy flanking/CQC manoeuvres those npcs would pull off is just astounding.
There was a discussion on this sub a while ago about guards and how they react in stealth game. I think it would be indeed a mistake to make them too smart but on the other hand I think it would be more interesting to randomize their reaction (for instance showing fear when the player has already dispatched all the other guards or pretending to not see you because he’s not paid enough for this shit) and react to different stimuli (for instance if you cleared a level almost completely, the last guard would notice it).

It would encourage the player to use alternate solution instead of always using the same old method: isolating and dispatching.
God I wish someone would try a game in the vein of Black and White again. Raising your creature was such a unique and fun experience. I had a lion that was just a sweetheart in the town, but outside of the walls he would fuck anybody up.
My friends discovered that if you punished your creature constantly/arbitrarily, it would eventually become neurotic and too scared to do anything. In hindsight, it's a little depressing how realistic that is...
[deleted]
>The thing about an AI that's smarter than a player, is it's pretty much indistinguishable from cheating.

Only if cleverness actually determines who wins. Most video games are very asymmetric so that doesn't have to be the case. E.g. no matter how genius a small squad of Grunts in Halo get, Master Chief has such an overwhelming advantage in stats that a good human player will be able to defeat them.

And besides, why are you even talking about beating the player? As a designer, you decide what your AI's goals are. If you think outside the box a bit, you can easily give AI a different optimization target than winning really hard. E.g. the AI in Left 4 Dead.

Then finally, even if the computer *is* playing the same game as the human and they *are* trying to win, even then it can be a great experience. I have the most fun in competitive games when I'm playing against an opponent who does some things better than me and some things worse than me, and I can learn from them or try to leverage where I'm better to defeat them. You could make an AI target this experience.

A stupid AI that makes horrible decisions but just gets a lot of bonuses and therefore is moderately competitive vs me will never teach me anything and also quickly stops being fun to play against.
Not really. Cheating is seeing player moves through fog of war or getting bonuses etc. AI that can win without having an edge over the player is good AI.
>The thing about an AI that's smarter than a player, is it's pretty much indistinguishable from cheating.

This gets trotted out every time this discussion comes up, but I never see any evidence for the claim. What games had AI that was so smart that everyone thinks it's cheating?
That was from Horizon Zero Dawn, right? Probably one of the best-feeling combat systems out there IMO. I'm excited to see what the Death Stranding team is doing with that engine.
Dwarf Fortress has astonishingly complex AI under the hood. As it's half game, half simulation the whole game is in itself one big giant AI composed of countless tiny threads of individual AIs.

Even just playing the game you don't really get a sense of it. But even a single dwarf has an incredibly convoluted linearity of personal inclinations defined by their past trauma and experiences.
I'm curious, but do you have any background in dev or game dev in particular?
but they have aimbots and wall hacks.
You bastard, now I have to play it again.
Also known as "Sir Kicksalot Deathboot and the Conveniently Placed Spiked Wall".
You know everyone talks about the ledge kicking in that game, but my favorite thing is easily smashing chairs over people's heads...and rocks...and barrels. And throwing the occasional cup just for laughs.
A big part of the reason guards/enemies are so vocal is so players know what's going on. 

If they're 'smart' and flank you while being silent, players just feel like it was an unfair ambush, or maybe it was just random bad luck. If an enemy yells "I'm gonna flank" and they get to see them moving around or they can choose to counter the flanker. They appreciate what's going on and what the AI 'thought process' is.

Then there's the question of if the player actually knows the difference between that all being scripted per-encounter, or if the AI recognizes locations and routes in a level and thinks about using a side route while player attention is elsewhere, when not to just attack. A lot of games are smoke and mirrors, and it might be a better use of time to disguise the scripted approach.
> 
> …except for the fact that they keep SCREAMING their position and what they’re going to do to the player.

It's so the player realizing what they're doing and doesn't think the AI is just a cheating bastard, which is what playtesters were saying before they added in the barks.
Interesting to see that almost all the people answering to your thread talk. About combat.

What about npcs? There are no smart or interesting npcs in video games.

I believe the industry does not know how to do smart AI (non combat).
maybe you should play csgo
imagine if it happened in real life.
>l think it would be indeed a mistake to make them too smart but on the other hand I think it would be more interesting to randomize their reaction (for instance showing fear when the player has already dispatched all the other guards or pretending to not see you because he’s not paid enough for this shit) and react to different stimuli (for instance if you cleared a level almost completely, the last guard would notice it).

If I recall correctly, the Arkham games do this already. The last guard, or few guards, get really nervous and start frantically looking for you. Especially if instead of taking down the henchman, you hang them upside-down, that increases their unease.
Too much randomization is actually not that great of an idea for AI in stealth games.

As with any game, there need to be patterns that the player can learn to recognize and exploit in order to become better. Obviously a small degree of randomness is important to have, and there is nothing wrong with guards that have complex behavior, but that behavior needs to be consistent and predictable. This allows the player to devise strategies and techniques.

When a player fails at an encounter or a task in a game, they need to be able deduce why exactly they failed so they can attempt to correct that error on subsequent attempts. To many random guard behaviors, such as a guard randomly deciding that he isn’t compensated enough to pursue you, will leave the player confused as to wether their success was a fluke when that guard decides to chase them on subsequent attempts.
Black and White 2 was my jam.
There is a nuance.  


Script generally means it will do a predetermine sequence of actions  
Where as many means by AI, something that will "determine" the sequence of actions to take
That's not how an AI works.

AI makes a spontaneous decision based on the events around them, which is the exact opposite of performing predetermined tasks on a schedule unless interrupted.

To use the infamous cheating NPC example...

In Oblivion, the NPC will cheat on his wife like clockwork unless the player interferes. There is no AI decision being made, he's just following a predetermined set of tasks. If it were an AI making this decision, the NPC would be cheating whenever his wife NPC was away, at varied times based on the wife NPC actions and the availability of the mistress NPC. It would be spontaneous, not predetermined.

Think of it like the difference between an enemy's actions in Metal Gear Solid before and after interacting with the guards. Before you interact with them, they will follow a set patrol route. No AI there. However if Snake taps on a wall or gets caught, their actions are now dependent on what is happening and what they can do in response. That part is AI.
Well, I wouldn't say it's cheating, but I don't agree with you either.

Good AI in my opinion can be broken down into two categories.

1.  Technically good AI.  This is the AI that can win without getting an edge.  This is actually incredibly easy to create and implement, but will be viewed by most people as terrible AI.  Why?  Because your average person is stupid.  Like, really, really, stupid.  The AI will flank, work as a team, etc., and dominate the player.  Just play any first person shooter to verify this.  You'll see people making tons of dumb mistakes that should always be avoided, and then they'll be complaining about the other team cheating, when the fault really resides on their end.

2. AI that's just slightly worse than the player.  Now this is incredibly difficult to program.  This is what most people want.  They want to be able to win, with feeling like they just squeaked out a victory.  First though, this type of AI can be exploited.  I.e. Need for Speed was notorious for having rubber banding AI.  On multiple occasions people noticed that they'd lose if they drove practically flawlessly, but would win if they acted like idiots the first portion of the race and then drove flawlessly.  How can an AI adjust to this?  Second, how do you just how good a player is, just to be slightly worse?
Offhand, I know FFT Calculators are so amazingly smart that for Crystal Calc SCCs, the general advice is to put the game on autobattle.
[deleted]
Exactly why I love the Rock It Launcher and Junk Jet in Fallout
https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/TheComputerIsACheatingBastard

Don't thank me guys
They do, but it's a pointless waste of resources.

99.9% of players won't appreciate the difference between a smart, non-combat AI and a dumb one. Hell, even smart combat AIs routinely get dumbed down because it turns out that fighting enemies smarter than you when they also outnumber you is a bad time.
Yes and they will also adapt to the tactics you use. Keep swinging from gargoyles? They'll destroy them or booby trap them. You keep using vents to get them? They'll blow them up with a grenade. They will lay down mines and turrets and stuff to hinder your mobility. It's awesome.
True, I wasn't thinking about this example specifically but that's a good point.
>will leave the player confused as to wether their success was a fluke when that guard decides to chase them on subsequent attempts.

But there’s also the problem of a player that becomes to good at the game, they end up having no challenge because patterns become predictable.
Exactly what I was about to point out.
AI isn't making up any new actions. "AI" in every game is working from a predetermined sequence of actions. At a very basic level, it's a series of if/then statements, aka a script.
The difference is the schedule.

The actions are still predetermined.  The enemies didn't come up with their action on the spot, they react to one of several predetermined stimuli with one of several different predetermined actions.

AI in games is a lot less spontaneous than you're making it out to be.
> unless the player interferes. 

At which point the behavior changes.

NPC behavior in every single game will remain unchanged absent player intervention.
I ask because I was wondering where you got the idea about "studios have to make a choice between keeping up with current graphics trends, and having very good AI".

I don't think it's down to limited processing power. I'd probably put it more down to the amount of time devs have to actually develop satisfying AI. Modern gaming consoles / PCs have such an overabundance of memory and processing power that it doesn't tend to be the limiting factor any more.
I don't think so

Populate the gta world with an AI that can have a meaningful conversation with me. That tells me about the day. That goes buy an umbrella when it rains, make friends, etc.....


Then we ll see
Ok thanks. It's been a few years since I played an Arkham game, I had forgotten about that
That is why you want multiple enemy types that exhibit a variety of behaviors, rather than enemies that are merely random.

New enemy types can be introduced over time, and those enemies can be arranged in new configurations in order to match the player’s learning curve.
Yep a script can be a full ai, but generally speaking when we talk about ai, we talk about the architecture/algorithm that use those if/else. Because by your definition every software ever created is a script and an ai. Thus that definition is not that useful.

I'm an ai programmer :)
This is just completely wrong. AlphaGo for example is playing games that no one has ever seen or thought of before (because of the massive action space of Go) and even plays moves that human experts consider to be innovative. By what stretch of the imagination is this a predetermined sequence of actions?

The only thing you were right about is that a scripted sequence can indeed be a form of AI.
> The actions are still predetermined. The enemies didn't come up with their action on the spot, they react to one of several predetermined stimuli with one of several different predetermined actions.
> 
> AI in games is a lot less spontaneous than you're making it out to be.

Which is how people react to stimuli. If you're a guard in a facility and you come across footsteps, you investigate because that's your job. If you come across an intruder, you attempt to deal with them. If they react with force, you react in kind, or maybe you'll flee if you're wounded. Depending on the area you're in, you might use a skid with boxes on it for concealment if you're attacked so it's harder for your attacker to accurately shoot at you, or retreat to a doorway through a brick wall for cover so that the bricks can soak up the gunfire.

AI in games is a lot better at mimicking a human response than you're pretending, if it's done right. Several games do so.
Being deliberately obtuse, are we?
It also stands out to me that the people making graphics are going to be a different discipline to the AI team. Seriously, look at the credits for any modern game and it's a huge amount of people involved, it's not the 90's when you might be lucky to have a dozen people.

And definitely agreed about overabundance of processing power. People have been saying the consoles or 'toaster' low spec PCs are holding things like AI back, but the some of the common examples of impressive AI are all well over a decade old and even the most modest modern hardware will play them without a problem.

AI seems more like a design/implementation problem fitting it into the gameplay than it does a processing power problem.
[deleted]
>Populate the gta world with an AI that can have a meaningful conversation with me. That tells me about the day. That goes buy an umbrella when it rains, make friends, etc.....

That's a lot of work for what is basically going to wind up as a gimmick.

Maybe 0.1% (or even less) of the players who play GTAV would bother to actually engage with random NPCs enough that that level of depth of AI is necessary, and it sure as shit would cost more than 0.1% of the game's budget to do so in a meaningful way.

It is technically possible. Off the top of my head I can think of at least two or three broad-level approaches to creating such a system which would allow you to pick a random NPC, get their phone number in-game, and then integrate them into the cast like an actually fleshed-out character that was meant to be there in the first place. It would be simple to implement, but very costly in terms of development time and resources.

However the fact that it's possible doesn't make the development of such AI practical or feasible for a video game's purpose.
Well I'd be interested to see what you dig up. I studied Comp Sci at uni so have a fairly good idea of how development goes - but ~~know~~ not much knowledge specifically around game dev.
[deleted]
Well well that's pretty interesting. Kind of a shame that the AI devs get the shaft like that but I guess also not that surprising. People are like crows. We like shiny things. 

Also had no idea about a dedicated "AI Chip" even being a possibility, but it's certainly a cool one.
I don’t play games where the point remotely lays in having full conversations where I as the player have to initiate fully formed questions and statements, and if I did (VN, point and click, etc), I would prefer a bespoke and curated experience, story and dialogue. But hey- that’s me. I can’t speak for others. I just see it as a “bells and whistles” sort of application to most current forms of gaming, and can’t see it as anything but a distraction in any kind of game where the point isn’t to test the conversational capabilities of a non-human conversationalist. 

I have to admit- it would be kinda funny to ask Zoltan in Witcher 3 for example how to make a soufflé just to see what he comes up with in his voice and affectation, but again- I’d show it to 3 friends who would only find it impressive if they hadn’t seen it before I showed it to them, we’d all agree that it was cool and advanced, and then I’d go back to wanting Zoltan to help me figure out who Dandelion was boning so we could track his whereabouts.
A game just released during the 2023 gamejam called "Detective GPT" which integrates the AI pretty well. It's crude, but a good first step.
[AI powered NPC dialog is already being worked on](https://youtu.be/jH-6-ZIgmKY), but believable NPC dialog is still probably a few years away. This kind of tech is super promising and can really add so much to role playing in games.
What I'd like to know is why all these discussion threads get donvoted to oblivion. I wanna hear the discussions about it.
Its got some hurdles to overcome. It took a week, maybe 2, for that Twitch show "Nothing Forever"  to get banned because it started to make transphobic jokes. No developer or publisher is gonna want to put something into a game where they can't control what is going to be said.

I would imagine as soon as a major game implements this the various Ratings Boards across the world will probably crack down on it. So the only games that would get something like this are games that are already aiming for a mature audience.
I don't think many people wanna manually input dialogue to talk to NPCs. It seems tedious to do so. Could work well for a Visual Novel or text adventure tho. Wouldn't be a lotta fun to have to contribute a lotta effort into talking to random NPCs in a RPG. I would like to see more life brought towards them tho. It helps make the world feel alive when they react to occurrences that happen in the game. I like talking to NPCs in Dragon Quest because of that.
I got a lot of joy out of npc to npc conversations in Oblivion, I imagine AI is probably already pretty good at simulating something similar. The question is, if the novelty would wear off if multiple games are doing it/we're more aware of the background process.
Todd Howard has been talking a bit about it in his Interview with Lex Friedman. 
Pretty interesting stuff. 
This will most certainly be a reality in a few years imo.
I really don't want this in games. 

In almost every regard, I would always prefer human written dialogue and story telling. AI just can't match human emotion and storytelling. If that results in less dialogue, then that's a sacrifice I'm willing to make for quality.
I think implementing such an ai would only work in online games, as the best on device AI we have is still Siri
What would an AI be able to accomplish in the field of NPC chatter that wouldn't be better suited to a human?. In my experience an NPC has to say very specific things or else what is even the point of it existing? 

For example, say it's an inconsequential NPC in a town of an RPG. What information would you possible have to gain from them that isn't already solved by manual text? Is there a risk that an AI wouldn't understand what the player should or shouldn't know already and inadvertently give away plot points? Or would it perhaps just drone on and on about pointless information that doesn't even line up with another NPCs text, or maybe even conflict with the overarching plot or world building?

AI isn't really Intelligent, it's more akin to very complex algorithms than another human mind. And if it does cross that threshold, isn't it very inhumane to expect that we can make them slaves to our whims of creativity?
in order for this to be not just a gimmick it needs to be just one aspect of the super NPC AI. Each NPC would need to be able to do three things 

1.  have goals, likes, dislikes and the ability to change these things overtime.
2.  be able to acknowledge the changes in their world and voice an opinion on them.
3. have ability and initiative to affect the world outside of the player's influence.

throw in something that makes each NPC even more unique, like say letting each one develop an entirely original type of magic based on who they are and their past experiences and you've got a truly living breathing world who's population and landscape will shift and warp as power hungry mages ascend to lichdom only to be felled by heroes who rose to the call when their villages were destroyed and all of it without the player doing anything.
I'm wondering if next gen consoles would have an integrated AI chip and use it to enhance reactivity and how NPCs and the like could react to the player. It doesn't have to be used for any real or central purpose, but general world building and reactivity.
Well as a game developer I am certainly thinking of how to work towards more interesting NPC AI with a transformer! Just in my hobby time. I might then actually encounter NPC interactions in my own game that surprise me and make the world that I create even more alive.

And I'm not at all worried about the AI doing anything like taking over, or being scary or something. It's still my storytelling, but then smartly mixed. Very much like an interpolation machine, between multiple text options that I taught it. I like it!
unreal engine integration with live AI chat: [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h4Vr-n0XNdg](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h4Vr-n0XNdg)

Not 10 years away.
[deleted]
Well said!
[deleted]
And it will be probably as shitty and generic as their ai generated quests.
[deleted]
There is probably room for both. In some games it could be interesting, in others full designed and scripted events work better.     


Imagine a procedural games like No Mans Sky... but with tons of full interactive NPCs that can assigned story driven quests.
I could see this being really fantastic for a game like No Mans Sky, where everything is already procedurally generated outside of a few things.
Fully procedural entertainment is an inevitability I also don’t want to race toward.
Writing will never go away, but i can see it being implemented to fill in gaps rather than replace the main writers.

If you want to fill a world with NPC's there's only so much a writing team can do before you have to have NPC's either constantly repeating themselves, or you have to limit the amount of NPC's in your game. With chat AI you could expand this significantly.

Look at it this way: Developers already make use of procedural tech when creating large landmasses, however they still determine its general design and they still fill in critical details in main locations. I think chat AI could be used the same way. The writers can focus on writing the main story and main characters, give a decent amount of side characters some dialogue, and let the less important NPC's be handled by a chat AI.

One example would be a game like Cyberpunk 2077: You have the main and side quests fully handled by the main writing team, but there's tons and tons of NPC's which are basically identical and only say 2-3 lines. Let a chat AI handle those to give it more variety and depth (assuming halfway decent voice synthesis would also be available). In that game it'd even be kind of thematic too :P

Chat AI will never replace human writers, but in this way i think it'd add a bit of life to certain kinds of games (mostly large open world rpg's) . That said, it'll be 5 to 10 years *at least* until this becomes viable, maybe longer. What we have now is still incredibly crude.
>I really don't want this in games. 
>
>In almost every regard, I would always prefer human written dialogue and story telling. AI just can't match human emotion and storytelling. If that results in less dialogue, then that's a sacrifice I'm willing to make for quality.

You don't see it ever improving? This is great. Especially in open world RPGs where the voice acting always sucks, and is expensive to do well with massive amounts of audio bulking up the game size.
This honestly just a pretty naïve take.
Artificial Intelligence will get better and will at some point be functionally indistinguishable from human writing. 
You "wanting" human written dialogue is purely based on emotional biases.
That's generally a device problem though. Since most handheld devices don't have the processing power to run a good AI.

OPs idea in theory is actually doable right now. The problem would be implementing it into a game, without the user needing a top of the line PC and having 5minute loading times per response.
The advancement is say you have a game like Cyberpunk or GTA where NPCs are just fodder that occasionally say weird phrases.  

Theoretically if they AI was good enough you could automate full in the moment conversations with these NPCs. Hell you might even be able to automate full mini quests.  

I think for some types of games this would work well (games that try to build fully immersive worlds), for others it would be unnecessary.
Spoken like someone who literally has no idea about how any of that works lol
You had me till that last sentence.  I fully believe that we will get to a point where AI is creating games (barring legislation preventing that) but the full extent of what you're suggesting is more than 10 years away.  There's definitely a market for it though, if a company like EA could lay off its studio's workforces and just have executives/writers along with an IT department to maintain their AI farms I can definitely see it happening.  

I guess the real proof of concept would be to see if Chat GPT can write a program to generate something like a text based adventure game.  I've never been able to get through the queue to actually generate something and I don't have the time right now.
By my reckoning, large language models are too unreliable for important work, too quickly outdated for internet search, too expensive to generate for personal projects... but they may actually make sense for use as toys and games. It's unfortunate that their position as the last, desperate hope for investors trying to catch the "next big thing" might make them poisonous to the one market they might be useful to.
But this is actually good.
At firat sure.
But I think in a few decades this will have developed to a point where we can't imagine it any other way.
Classic Todd, just looking out for the people. He always knows what we really want.
Writing is one of those things I DON'T want generated. 

I don't truly believe AI chats in video games would maintain any believable conversation. I tried to talk to one of those AI bots that pretend to be characters. I thought I was gonna talk to Master Chief, instead within 5 minutes the bot had broken down so bad it literally morphed into believing it was a 16 year old autistic girl from the UK who didn't know what Halo was. I made Paul Atreides believe his dad was alive and was a huge fan of 22 Jump Street. Sure, it's endless conversations, but it's mostly nonsense and it wouldn't work in a game with established lore and settings and stories when you can just talk an AI into believing something. 

I sincerely don't believe that tech can do anything better then a human writer. Human writers can put emotion into their dialogue and stories, meaning and purpose. AI can't do that. Procedurally generating a level makes sense in some games, especially NMS where it's all about exploring an endless universe. But every single time, I will always prefer a human writer who can write something interesting and compelling, rather then an AI that MIGHT be able to string together a few sentences but inevitably break down and fall back on generic responses.
That’s what I’m saying though. I could be wrong but afaik chat GPT only runs off online servers right now, and it’s still too slow to use in a game. We still need another few generations of CPU upgrades for it to make sense to implement in offline games on consoles/PC, and we at least improvements in networking infrastructure to make it viable via online processing. Sure it’s “doable” now but not in any capacity that really matters.
Exactly this. It would be very beneficial for open world games to make it seem believable. Not just in a conversation sense but the npc ai as well. Instead of just having an npc stand around grumbling the same couple phrases as you walk by, they could pull out conversations based on things they saw, heard, know about the player etc. Some npc already do this to an extent in some games, where they will make a comment about something the player has done previously. The difference is the devs wouldn't have to manually program these interactions for each npc they want them to occur with. It could go way more in depth than that.

>I guess the real proof of concept would be to see if Chat GPT can write a program to generate something like a text based adventure game.  I've never been able to get through the queue to actually generate something and I don't have the time right now.

I'm not even sure that at some point in the future the AI needs to write a program for making a game. Rather the program would be implicit in it's training weights.

It's like right now we are using a lot of fancy algorithms in a game engine to create lifelike visuals. We're calculating how the polygons are moving, how they are oriented with respect to the camera and light sources, where they would be projected onto the screen etc. pp.
On the other hand, image generation AIs don't do any of that, instead they just immediately draw the pixels in a way that they have learned what photos and drawings look like.


So maybe at some point in the future you don't need an AI that writes game logic but rather an AI that has learned how to draw images and update the next one in the sequence based on player input etc.

This is obviously not 2 years away but I'm curious if our outlook on how to use AI changes as the tech gets more widespread and we get used to it (think about how the first cars basically looked like horse carriages because that's what people had in their mind for transportation and it's what workshops were already comfortable building).
a decade at most, probably closer to 7 years
Dude, all of the conversations  but the main quest dialogue in nms is procedural, I genuinely think an AI would do a better job of it than the system that's there.  Also, you really underestimate how good AI is going to get in the coming years.  By the end of this decade we won't be able to tell the difference, and at that point what does it matter?
https://youtu.be/jH-6-ZIgmKY

Watch this. This was literally one year ago.
It doesn't matter. If you gonna make game, you gonna make it.

This is why indie games with retro graphics or even text adventure game still existed. They don't care to move to 3D photorealistic at all. 

Same as AI. They don't have to use it to make a game. They just make game their way. It also apply to engine choice as well. Even today, someone still make their own engine in order to make game.
I'll add a counter argument. There has never been a better time to be in games. There's things generative AI brings to the table that solve long standing gaps in gaming. The next 10 years are going to see an explosion of creativity and exploration of games, gaming technologies that's unprecedented.

Think of how hollow and brittle current games are with NPCs, with simulation of world events. Games also have a content problem, where we cant scale good content to match the desires of gamers. There's an endless list of ways in which AI can aid us. Current focus on GPT as a chatbot is not looking deep enough.

Now, selling games is an entirely different matter. But as someone who is excited about seeing the art of games advance, this is going to be fire.

Also, consider checking out my subreddit /r/aigamedev
The recent advances in AI that you're talking about don't really exist, outside of niche applications. There are some notable exceptions, but otherwise the field has been stagnant for decades.

What people think is advancement is merely using bigger and bigger datasets. ChatGPT is a prime example of this. They used enormous amounts of training data to get it to be even somewhat useful.

Here's the thing about training data. Very few have access to it, and it's ultra expensive to acquire and work with it, unless you steal it of course. It's mostly useless to small budget companies for basing complex products on.

The age of AI is not here yet. Until we have AI models that can be trained using the data generated by a very small number of people (say below 100), I wouldn't discount the importance of traditional development just yet.
AI was a popular topic at GDC this year. Several platforms are integrating ChatGPT or similar services, which can already generate code. There are others looking at 2D to 3D generation, procedural generation, and other automation. Large studios like Epic are making investments in this area, so I expect fairly rapid adoption over the next few years. Check out the State of Unreal.
The 1980s.

Probably the late 1980s and early 1990s.  

Yes, AI is improving substantially.  But it's been around for 50 years.  Perhaps you want to rephrase your question to "games using the next generation of AI?"
Probably never, the current nueral net/machine learning has massive problems both in being part of the production flow and lots of legal problems including copyright.
Never? AI as it stands now (machine learning models/neural nets) generating content and stuff is already a legislative hell and the prospect of using it in commercial products is unlikely at a large scale.

Right now it’s in “boom” aka some major advancements that interest the general public which is why it’s making the waves right now. But it will settle out and the general public will lose interest and it will just because an aspect of everything. It will continue to improve and get better but it will never replace creators. Sure you will see assholes like Ubisoft try and eek out junior positions with their script writer AI tools and stuff but look at all the backlash that got already. Companies will always try to save money but at the end of the day creators don’t have to let it control the industry.

You don’t personally have to use any AI tools or whatever and you don’t have to let it discourage you either. Do what you need to and take the time you need to consider your options but you should never stop creating what you want to create just because of things like this. It was just the other day that everyone wanted to make NFT & Blockchain game and we see how well that went.
If you’re worried about AI in general, there’s no industry you can hide in. Even physical trades will be affected by rapidly advancing robotics.

The best way to protect yourself from AI is to master wielding it.

That doesn’t mean losing your creativity or your own bespoke craftsmanship. AI is just a tool.

Don’t be like a hand-painter lamenting the invention of Photoshop and the death or their artistry.

The world will always change and you have to adapt to remain a part of its culture and industry.
Meh. I remember when “high level” languages that compiled to machine code were considered to be the death knell of “real” programmers. Or when people complained that nobody was learning “vanilla” JS anymore.

AI is just another abstraction that further removes the dev from the machine. You can choose to use it or not.
AI won't replace solo game developers' jobs for several reasons, even though AI has made significant advancements in recent years. Here are some key reasons why solo game developers will continue to be relevant:
  

  
Creativity and Originality: AI can generate content based on patterns and data it has been trained on, but it still lacks the ability to create truly original and innovative concepts. Solo game developers can come up with unique ideas, characters, and storylines that AI might struggle to create.
  

  
Emotional Intelligence: Human game developers have a deep understanding of human emotions and can create experiences that evoke emotional responses from players. AI, on the other hand, lacks the emotional intelligence to create nuanced experiences that resonate with players on a deeper level.
  

  
Complex Decision-Making: Game development often involves making complex decisions based on multiple factors, such as design, budget, and player feedback. AI might be able to assist with some aspects of decision-making, but it is not yet capable of understanding and balancing all the factors that go into game development.
  

  
Artistic Vision: Solo game developers often have a strong artistic vision for their games, which helps them create unique experiences. AI-generated content, while impressive, can sometimes lack the personal touch and distinctiveness that comes from an individual's artistic vision.
  

  
Collaboration and Communication: Game development often requires collaboration and communication with others, such as artists, musicians, and writers. Solo game developers are skilled at working with others to bring their ideas to life, while AI still struggles with understanding and responding to human communication in a meaningful way.
  

  
Adaptability: Game developers need to adapt to new technologies, trends, and player expectations. While AI can be trained to adapt to some extent, human developers can more easily adjust their approach based on the ever-changing landscape of the gaming industry.
  

  
In summary, AI has the potential to assist solo game developers in various aspects of game development, but it is unlikely to replace their jobs entirely. Human game developers possess unique skills, creativity, and emotional intelligence that are difficult to replicate with AI, allowing them to create experiences that resonate with players on a deeper level.

&#x200B;

Chatgpt's answer
Ai will at best be able to make super simple games in our lifetime. There's a huge difference between generating a script and a whole game.
People still spend their time and money on candy crush.

AI isn't going to steal anybody's candies.

Just because you can build StarCraft 3 in 5 minutes of prompting doesn't mean you're going to have a good game. And no, AI won't be building StarCraft 3.
To your question of *How long?*, unfortunately the answer for indie devs/small studios is ***last month***.

Before the end of this year, we will have fully AI generated scripts, short-form movies, and soundtracks, with AI actors and voices. In fact, we should have this by summer.

*Every* knowledge-based industry will change over the next few months. Especially gaming, with a projected **$396 billion** in gaming revenue for 2023.

If you aren't starting to incorporate AI into your tool set, you will be left far, far behind.

- 2d / 3d texture map graphical assets can be currently generated. 
- AI generate pixel art is already in play.
- AI generated audio [music, speech] exists.
- AI generated content that caters to individual players.
- So much more...

The next/current level of chat bots that will take absolutely takeover **all** social media with *un-fucking-precedented* coherency and mind blowing conversational skills. This means you can stuff all your social media with bots that are all but indistinguishable from humans -right now. [if it's not clear, that translates to a marketing team that costs pennies to operate 24/7].

All the pieces exist and are falling very neatly in place as we type.

*Should you go into carpentry?* If you don't already make a good living making games *AND* you are choosing to ignore AI in your tool set, then **yes**, go into carpentry. 

Or focus on B2B application development.
 
You will not catch up without AI.
Is this post generated as a generic reply to some other post?

Doesn't address anything I said at all.
Is there really need for such pedantics? With current events, I think it is fairly clear what I am referring to.
>lots of legal problems including copyright.

the only people that think this are people that don't actually understand copyright law

the only major open question is can the works produced by AI be copyrighted, and the answer seems to be "only if a human also had significant involvement", so that's a pretty big gray area.  This is a question that will be answered in the next few years.
>legal problems including copyright

The only problems are about dataset distribution, LAION-5B might be invalid if deemed not sufficiently transformative, unlike google books.

Also, this is a to the absolute-T a technological war issue. No sane court is going to rule against training material consumption and would only ever rule about distribution. Ruling against the use of copy-written training material means giving unilateral victory to other parties (China will just do its' thing and own everyone by giving zero shits).

AI is a war and infrastructure power issue at the lowest.
"probably never"

funniest shit I've ever read

here you go

[https://www.reddit.com/r/blender/comments/121lhfq/](https://www.reddit.com/r/blender/comments/121lhfq/)

&#x200B;

don't hide your head in the sand
The legal “problems” are massively over blown. The legal issues will settle out the way they always settle out…in favour of those who lobby best. Which means that if big content producers want generative assets copyrightable…they will end up copyrightable.
I don't understand why people say "never"

give me a reason why this is not a counterpoint to your argument then

[https://www.reddit.com/r/blender/comments/121lhfq/](https://www.reddit.com/r/blender/comments/121lhfq/)
AI has the potential to replace many jobs, including those of solo game developers, for several reasons:
  

  
Improved efficiency: AI can perform tasks faster and more accurately than humans, which means that the development of games can be streamlined. As AI technology advances, it can automate many aspects of game development, such as coding, designing, and testing, freeing up time for developers to focus on other aspects of the project or even making their jobs obsolete.
  

  
Cost-effectiveness: Employing AI can be more cost-effective than hiring human developers, as AI doesn't require benefits, vacations, or a salary. This economic advantage may lead game development companies to invest in AI technology to reduce costs, which could lead to a reduced demand for solo game developers.
  

  
Advanced tools: AI-driven tools are becoming more sophisticated and capable of generating complex assets, such as 3D models, textures, animations, and even procedural level design. These tools can greatly reduce the workload of a solo game developer and, in some cases, replace the need for their expertise altogether.
  

  
Procedural content generation: AI can generate game content procedurally, creating endless variations of levels, characters, and narratives. This technology can potentially replace solo game developers as it can create game worlds and stories that would take a human developer significantly more time to create.
  

  
Personalized gaming experiences: AI can analyze player behavior and preferences, tailoring game experiences to individual players. This level of personalization can be hard for solo game developers to achieve, as it requires a deep understanding of user data and the ability to adapt the game in real-time based on this information.
  

  
However, it is essential to note that while AI can replace certain tasks and aspects of a solo game developer's job, it may not be able to fully replace human creativity, intuition, and the unique perspective that a solo game developer brings to their work. As AI technology advances, it is more likely that it will complement and augment the work of game developers rather than fully replace them.

&#x200B;

further chatgpt's answer
last month games that are using AI got released substantially?

can you name some so I can take a look?
Their point is, if you want to keep doing things the way you're choosing to do them, then as a solo dev you have that prerogative.  If you don't want to be an AI prompter -> editor or whatever, then just *don't use those tools*.  But also, don't be afraid of new tools.

That said, you're thinking way too far ahead.  AI creating any meaningful game requires having enough understanding of interconnecting complex mechanics and knowing what makes something fun.  This level of AI is decades away if it's even possible at all.
ID3 and K-NNs have been used for ages.

They're still learning models that benefit from adversarial training.

Killer Instinct literally has you train a K-NN dataset with the whole shadow system.

There's more than just deep useless learning out there.
Idk why others downvoted you here. I hate people who talk like that. Pedantic nonsense.
No AAA is going to risk having their assets unprotected by copyright. It is a huge grey area and publishers do not roll dice with their IP.
Nice anecdotal evidence you got there
I saw you already posted this and would probably say something.

To me this is just part of the “boom” period of all this just like NFT/Blockchain stuff the last few years. They basically say their boss doesn’t care about the product and just wants to make money and save time. Yeah that’s gonna happen and it’s to be expected, but I wouldn’t expect it on a large scale. You will see it happen sure, but it’s not gonna consume everything and take over in my opinion.

I’m sorry if it gets you down and I hope you can still find passion and joy in creating and making things.
My personal human opinion, it is a great tool, for solo developers like us, it helps me a lot and will save me money.

Unless you are a concept artist or a translator, your job are alright in the next couple of years
Right now no one [or no studio] is going to admit to using AI assets/assistance since the both the massive negative public opinion and the murky legality are huge issues. During the 'last month', a bunch of AI projects really took off. Stable Diffusion and ChatGPT being some of the most talked about.

Here's a glimpse of what is *publicly* available on right now:

- mubert
- stable diffusion
- nvidia nerf
- llama llm
- copilot

You'll see very quickly how much AI is affecting all facets of game dev.
3-4 years away.
I disagree

luddites should just get out
I do think it's very likely that it's going to come down on the side of the things AI makes will be copyrighted.
exactly

indie games will be flooded with AI generated stuff

either way steam was already flooded with asset flips

indies never stood a chance
gamedevs mindbroken are really an amazing sight
So ridiculous

So many people who cannot answer a question
My previous statement is more about 3D games than *any* game.  Given that the idea of "video game" is an extremely broad concept with an even wider breadth of quality and content, can you say which game or genre that exists today you think AI might be able to replicate in 3-4 years time?

Personally, I actually wouldn't be surprised if AI is capable of reaching a rudimentary 2D Metroidvania style game by then.  Of course, how fun that game is (game design) and how well it flows (level design) I think would still be significantly lacking in that time.

But meaningful 3D games with complex, overlapping mechanics?  Not gonna happen any time soon
Based
though, who knows for sure I guess https://www.reuters.com/legal/ai-created-images-lose-us-copyrights-test-new-technology-2023-02-22/
Good luck out there, brother!
AI is 3-4 years away from being capable of making any game, of any genre, with enough rigorous detailed input. You will not be able to tell it to "make a game just like Skyrim" in 3-4 years but I'm confident that you will be able to sit down with it and extract 99% of what is necessary to make a game like Skyrim in that time.
Welp, only time will tell
Might be rather scientific, but [these guys](https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.05521) just published a paper on a deep learning based AI for Doom
Something like that is currently in development: http://www.helloneighborgame.com/

I have no clue how they do this and I'm not affiliated in any way with the developers.
From what I've read, AI is usually discouraged in games. The players like to kill dumb and predictable enemies. Therefore the swarm of zombie-themed games. But I'd love to see a game where AI is something to distinguish it from the crowd (aside from GO and Chess AI). 
This might be an [interesting read](http://www.kbs.twi.tudelft.nl/docs/MSc/2001/Waveren_Jean-Paul_van/thesis.pdf) for you.
This vid goes into the history of bots, and shows the ingenious ways the old Quake and Unreal devs programmed their AI.

Basically, AI had to act as much like an actual human as possible, because most people didn't have fast internet connection.

https://youtu.be/uoYjayrKRDs
NN is a solution to a fuzzy problem where information is incomplete but training examples are more abundant.  For example, you could use NN to improve the aim of a particularly bad shooter to make a FPS more fun for a weaker player. You could use a NN to manage a sidekick that tries to fill in for your weaknesses, or one that gets weaker as you get stronger, or finds ammo for you based on your typical firing rate.   As others said, it's not great for opponents except in strategy games as they can get better than you fast, but it might be a great solution to reduce frustration if levels are crazy difficult.  For most game scenarios, AIs are typically more procedural and there's no reason to put a NN on it because a variable with a percentage is usually good enough. Creatures (old game) had some rudimentary AI learning capability. if I recall.
 
If I'm understanding the second half of your post correctly, I think you should read [this](https://www.google.com/url?q=http://users.cecs.anu.edu.au/~rsl/rsl_papers/99ai.kambara.pdf&sa=U&ved=0ahUKEwiDtJ3i-sbPAhULz2MKHaHPCZUQFggQMAA&sig2=PiFkUjcYje-cxTHpyX9ptw&usg=AFQjCNGx2zaMyP_SU1__BrwHVIX6NAO6Yg) to get a better understanding of AI in general before applying it to games. Good luck!
virtua fighter on saturn had a learning a.i.  


the intent was that the a.i.'s improvements would be used gradually more frequently as the difficulty setting progressed from the first fight to the final boss.

except it was too good at learning player habits to the point it would anticipate everything you could do  

it eventually was changed so you can 'reset' the a.i.'s learned behaviours.
http://left4dead.wikia.com/wiki/The_Director
Once I tried to implement neural network for mobs in Minecraft, but it was damn difficult for me to understand how NN works. With the experience I get in programming and especially game programming lately I consider to implement such mechanism in my current game. It would be amazing to see what mobs would do based on history of action in open-world game. I wish someone would do this :)
I think this is what you're looking for https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i51x6-8GqkA
I remember seeing this on kickstarter quite a while ago and was very sad when it didn't get funded. Looks like a fun concept although I doubt it will be a truly self learning AI. It will probably just be programmed to react in certain ways depending on what the player does and thats it it wont really learn on how the player is playing. Although thats just my own theory and I may be 100% wrong so take what im saying with a grain of salt.
> AI is usually discouraged in games

Exactly this.

Most players like to be superior, only a handful like a challenge. And when they take on a challenge, they like to find ways how to game it.

If this is true, that is awful. I long for the old school days of quake and unreal with actually challenging bots.
I'm studying applied computer science, so I've already been working with neural networks for years. I'm pretty sure you'd need the computational power of Google to even try and run the AI of a game like Minecraft with neural networks.  
There are so, so, so many inputs and unforeseeable stuff that pretty much presents a lot of edge cases that, in my opinion, it's just not worth it.  
  
That being said I think if the entire game is built on the very idea to have self-learning AI it might just work. That's why I'm trying to gather what has been done before.
I only remember playing these games multiplayer, how were the bots in terms of AI?

I think people are okay with difficulty and challenge, but not with AI that adapts/evolves to the players actions, humans are not equipped for that and certainly would not find enjoyment from it. The enjoyable part about challenge is overcoming, AI that is constantly adapting to the player takes away that part.
"Humans are not equipped for that and certainly would not find enjoyment from it."

Neither of those are true, but matter of opinion depending on the player. 

I for one love it. I played the new Unreal recently and it was awesome that I couldn't tell who was AI and who was human for a long while.

The real reason we rarely see adaptive AI anymore is because of costs. Now we can simply play online with other actual humans for a challenge, so there's no need to develop such a complex system.
To answer your first question, the rudimentary system was that the AI basically recorded your movements, and recombined them into new patterns. You jump a lot? So does the AI. You duck around corners to lure them into the open? So does the AI. You pull off a crazy meta map trick? The AI now can do the same. 
Hmm, yes looking back on my argument it was arrogant to assume people wouldn't enjoy it. It certainly is up to the individual player.

But at the same time I think if the market for it was adequately large, it would have been done. There are plenty of single player genres that could benefit from adaptive AI for a more immersive experience. Horror, Action/Adventure/RPG/Idon'tknowwhattocallthisbeastanymore, etc.


F.E.A.R, while its quite old, the enemy AI still holds up as they employ smart flank and rush tactics to flush you out of cover.
I am thinking rain world just because ai ecosystem is out of this world, also am thinking starsector coz fvck them ai ships
Alien: Isolation

The whole game is a survival horror masterpiece. That fucking Xenomorph has such an AI that has been praised for years and other devs have tried to replicate it without success.

Here’s a video example, bit of spoilers ahead just in case:

[Revisiting the AI of Alien: Isolation](https://youtu.be/P7d5lF6U0eQ)
F.E.A.R.

https://www.rockpapershotgun.com/why-fears-ai-is-still-the-best-in-first-person-shooters
The Last of Us Part II  
Alien: Isolation  
Dishonored 2
Metal gear solid 5
The enemies in Metal Gear Solid V
Last of Us 2 probably has the best I’ve ever seen. Enemies hunt you down like real people. 

Alien Isolation, as well. The xenomorph has jump scared me so many times
Alien isolation has probably the smartes AI. The alien chnages tactics. It catches on to your tricks. For example a noise maker device used for distracting the alien to a distant location works in the early game. But as the game goes on it ignores the noise maker and if you keep using it the aluen starts to run in the opposite direction on the noise maker which is where the player would be. Clever girl.
Rain World. People dedicate hours in it just to observe the AI. 😊
Some games with great enemy AI:

* MetalGearSolid V
* Generation Zero
* Sniper Elite 5
* Ghost Recon Wildlands

In all three the enemy AI communicate, will spread out, flank, use cover, use sound in addition to LOS to locate you, snipe from great distance, use mortars, grenades, rockets, and melee weapons, run away when attacked if they don't have a fix on you location, and have somewhat randomized patrol routes and spawn locations.

All four are single player with the option for co-oop play.
I’ve heard Alien Isolation has good AI if you like horror
S.T.A.L.K.E.R. Enemies will suppress your last known position, fall back and try to flank you. The mutants hunt in unique ways and they can been seen hunting eachother and other stalkers. AI stalkers live out their own lives in the zone outside of your influence. Great AI
I didn't play the **Halo series**, but my friend did and he won't stop talking about that exactly: how the single-player enemies would be smart to react appropriately to what you do.
Mount and Blade. The ai isn’t super smart, but it will keep troops in formation, flank with cavalry, hold strategic positions, and utilise siege weaponry. As for having teammates, it’s your army versus theirs, you’re commanding your own troops and fighting alongside them, and once you have companions you can make them command your troops instead.
S.T.A.L.K.E.R is what you need, the AI is pretty good at flanking around and taking you out especially at max difficulty where both of you are able to take each other out with one or two bullets.
Good ole chess
When I hear smart ai the first 2 games I think of are Alien Isolation & Black & White: 2. Black and white is an RTS game though and I don't think you can even obtain a legal copy of it anymore or run it on anything modern.   


Some sandbox games have some pretty impressive AI but less so for their combat ai. Like Red Dead: 2, Grand theft auto: 5 and Modded Skyrim. (Hell even vanilla skyrim has the npc's living their own lives which is pretty cool)
HOLY SHIT OP I NEED YOU TO SEE THIS. It’s perfect for you lol 

Play *Will you Snail?*

The AI is genius, and tries to predict your movements. It also mocks you when you fail. All around fantastic experience. And the AI is super smart.
Rainworld. Any other answer is wrong.
Ground Branch has some of the most realistic AI known to video game history, it’s a co-op shooter where the objective is to take out terrorist in a wide verity of maps. The AI is super smart and (depending on the difficulty) will act like real people. Every step you make they can hear even from long distances which is very realistic. I find this one of the best realistic shooter games just because of the AI. By the way if you intend on getting this game check the hardware requirements first and update your graphics driver before playing.
The enemy AI in The Forest is great.
God Eater 3 

Code Vein
You'll have to go back to the 2000s,the last games had any kind of challenge
ShatterLine. In Coop mode has enemy soliders that move exactly as you describe. Free on Steam.
Try Gears Of War 4 & 5 really good AI. Made me think the longer i played it, the enemies were learning my patterns.
FEAR

The Division 2

Unreal tournament 2k4
every good shooter should have the things you listed, i suggest destiny 2 or division 2.

they are solely about fighting mixed groups of these enemy types.
Some really smart people created a real AI bot with machine learning for rocket league. It's called nexto it's not exactly what you're looking for but interesting for people into game ai
You said you're burned out on strategy games, but unfortunately, that's what I have.

AI War: Fleet Command is an RTS inspired by Supreme Commander that can only be played multiplayer in co-op, because the AI is good. Very good. As in "if you beat the AI at maximum difficulty, the developers consider it a bug" good. There's a sequel that is a little different, but still good from what I hear. I haven't played too much of it.
Metal Gear Solid 2.
SWAT 4. You play the leader of a SWAT force. Your enemies will hide behind doors, rush you if you're exposed, etc. You have to be very methodical if you want you and your team to survive and also follow police procedures. There's no saving, and enemy/civilian locations will change each time you play a mission.

It's a bit old, but still worth it. I suggest the fourth have specifically because it is the most immersive. Unlike its predecessors, this one was developed by the developers of Bioshock.
FEAR
Halo infinite
Metal gear solid 5. The enemies will put on helmets if you get too many headshots. They will use flashlights if you attack bases commonly during night. They will wear gas masks if you use smoke grenades a lot. They will also not run directly towards gun fire.
back4blood the bots are really good, its sort of horde shooter so the enemy AI isn't really smart
Not sure but maybe halo firefight
Far Cry 2 + Redux mod on redux difficulty.
Sons of the forest
Guild Wars. The first one. Enemy AI actually work in groups against you and even use formation. They even make judgment calls about remaining in your AOE if they think they might be able to kill you first or getting out of them. They also can use their skills in combination with each other.
Army of Two
Death Stranding but I’d call it more of a smart immersive environment as opposed to necessarily any real “enemies”…
Halo Infinites ai is really advanced while playing forge firefight they use flank strategies and end up overwhelming me and my friends
adding on to this, there's a free demo on steam of the upcoming game Trepang 2, which seems to try to capture the same magic (as far as combat goes, it's not a horror title afaik). 

I had good fun with the demo and I feel I can recommend it to anyone who liked FEAR.
Fear still holds up nowadays on AI aswell
I second this. The best strat against those clones is to keep moving and check your back often.
[redacted] is smarter than mee I swear.
I second Rainworld, especially scavengers.
Its interesting because the AI there isn't really that sophisticated.

It basically boils down to:

\- Decision tree of the type used in every other AAA game ever with the caveat that certain paths in the tree get activated if the player has managed to avoid getting killed by the Xenomorph in certain ways. (gives the illusion of learning but its really just a hardcoded 'only allow this to happen N times before going down a better path')

\- Make sure the alien is vaguely in the same general area as the player

There are no fancy neural networks or new technologies here, they just did a better job of writing their decision trees than other games.
The Last of Us Part II has tremendously good ai. Plus, different enemy groups and types will have hugely different playstyles. Some groups are really aggressive, others employ more tactics and slowly flank in. Even when not actively fighting, the ai is great at reacting to the environment, commenting on traps and dead allies.
Added bonus of the AI generally behaving more believably and *NOT* getting a permanent GPS fix on you once you enter combat. I love that you can actually reliably flee or cat-and-mouse if you can break line of sight, and they'll search for you where they last saw you instead of just homing in on your real time location.
I've never played a single player game that had the balls to let an NPC shoot you in the face from 20 yards away within a second of establishing line of sight. One of the most challenging experiences I ever had. I heard they cut enemies that could sneak up on you unfortunately because players never notices them until it was too late.
I'm been obsessed with this game for a year now. The AI is indeed fascinating
I second Sniper Elite 5. I've had times where I could reliably work with the AI to flank an enemy sniper in VS mode.
Sorry man, the AI in WL is garbage. Aimbots, hivemind, never reloading their weapons, going in straight line, guys with uzis that can snipe you with no recoil. Breakpoint made them way more realistic.
There are A couple of S.T.A.L.K.E.R. games on steam, which one has this? Or is it all of them?
I find a bit hit and miss but when when its's good it's really good.
Weird, even with the AI on high settings for me on ground branch they don’t behave smartly. Ready or not does AI better than ground branch
Great game but AI is not that kind of smart op is looking for
What's smart about Code Vein's AI?
Yes to Unreal Tournament 2k4!  That is one game I still keep on every computer I own.  Loads of content, always a fun time.  :)
The screenshots look very much like the game is in the same alley as fear, will check it out :)
Didn't they already do that in MGS1 ? I remember them doing that
Agreed! 😊
All of them, though I think its shown the best in the first two (Shadow of Chernobyl and Clear Sky) though Call of Pripyat has the best AI overall.
Checkout Stalker Anomaly too.  It's a free game built on a custom engine based on the Stalker engine.  Everyone will say to start with SOC, but definitely keep Anomaly on your radar as something to graduate to.

The Stalker series has its own subreddit, I recommend checking that out.  The original games work on modern system, but there is a baseline community patch for each that fixes tons of bugs and/or adds QOL features.  (like ZRP for SOC)

Stalker uses something called A-Life which is like an grand AI director that connects all AI from every region, so even when you're not around, the AI is still doing stuff.

When you combo this and how the AI fights with mods, they become some of the best AI around.  Like, literally sneaking around cover to attack and whatnot.  They'll do this stuff in the vanilla game, but stuff like Anomaly makes it feel like real encounters.

I also recommend the game F.E.A.R.  The AI in that uses something called GOAP, the "Goal Oriented Action Planning system".  You can watch stuff about it, but it makes the encounters with the AI combatants feel organic.
Yeah, I'll take an advanced AI which is occasionally very dumb over an ai that just sits in cover all day.
The team mate AI is decent in RoN also, if you wanna play solo
The companion AI is fantastic
I'm late to the MGS party and haven't played the other MGS games, but you're right that it's definitely not a new concept. That said, AFAIK it's still rare for games with stealth mechanics to implement them well enough that running and hiding feels viable after detection. A lot of action games just tack on stealth as an afterthought.
This is kind of in-depth analysis /r/games needs more of. 

This channel is great at breaking down AI into an understandable concept and showing us behind the curtain 
I honestly think Halo 3 was the peak of gaming.  Amazing campaign with great gameplay, cinematic+interactive storytelling, the beautiful music that I still listen to in my car from time to time, perfect couch co-op, unlimited amounts of fun for online matchmaking for both competitive and casual, custom games that benefited big time from the creativity generated within Forge mode, and then the theater mode where you could go back and review all your shit.  Hell I got into filmmaking more seriously because of making machinimas with my friends using Halo 3.  It never felt like a dry experience.  You could play Halo 3 in any way and still have a blast.

11 years later and Halo 5 removed couch co-op which essentially kills a lot of the essence that was Halo.  I think studios have forgotten what made gaming great and should really go back and revisit Halo 3 to find out why it lasted for so long on the shelves as everyones must have video game.

EDIT:
watch this if you need more reasons why https://youtu.be/8aFMpmTv3lA
Hey everyone, just wanted to pop in here and say thanks for watching the video (that's my soothing Scottish tones you hear in the video).  As stated in the video a couple years back I did a video on [Halo 2](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NU717sd8oUc) (which sadly hasn't aged terribly well), but this gave me a nice opportunity to return to the series (though I did manage to spell Max Dyckhoff's name wrong - sorry!).  I was pleasantly surprised by how well Halo 3 holds up having not played it again since I first bought the Master Chief Collection a few years back.

Whether I can return to Halo in the future I'm not sure - I only make videos when I can be 100% confident in how the AI works in a given game.  There's not a huge amount of information about Halo 4 or 5 I've been able to find.  Right now the only Halo game I know I can tackle is Halo Wars 2 (which is really quite interesting when you know how that game works).
Don't have time to watch at the moment but man there isn't any other video game music that immediately strikes me like that piano at the beginning of the video. What a fucking game
Halo 3 will always be the pinnacle of gaming for me, 

&#x200B;

there is one word for the Halo campaign, legendary.
Hey cool I made this. Pretty surreal seeing my 10 year old GDC slides being used. And he spelled my last name wrong. :( 
When I first heard about *Halo Wars* I was super hyped because I thought maybe they were going to make an rts/shooter in which the units you produced would fight each other in the same way the AIs in the Halo series fought each other, which would have been *amazing*. Too bad it ended up being a mediocre and pretty standard RTS.

I used to re-load some of the larger fights between human/covenant/flood forces in Halo just to watch them play out in different ways. There was one particular fight I remember from the first game where an infected human had a rocket launcher and the whole fight hinged on whether they could land a good rocket hit before dying. 
Conceptually, this is a very intuitive system, but it sounds like something that could easily go wrong or have major issues that leads to bad behavior like random covenant running across the map to an objective 5 zones behind the player or running in circles as they thrash between tasks or something like that.

It's impressive that the system largely blended into the background of the game and did pretty much exactly what it was meant to do.

Halo's always had interesting AI just at the squad level with relatively simple enemies, that lead to emergent but manageable behavior when they are encountered in groups of varying pieces. An evolution of game design as old as gaming, but done really well with an understanding of the right level of complexity to make the player feel good. This system just takes that up a level.
This video was sooooo cool.

I really wonder if there other non Bungie FPS games that use just as an advanced AI task system. I personally feel like we haven't had that same level of AI depth since Halo: Reach in an FPS game. Even single player focused FPS games like Far Cry or Bioshock feel like they lack the same level of AI advancements.
Halo 3 is still my favorite of the Halo pve sandboxes. All thanks to the combination of the AI tree, the fantastic environment designs, the equally fantastic AI placements in those areas, the weapons sandbox full of old favorites, the familiar yet fresh vehicle sandbox and last but definitely not least the deployable equipment that added some minor variety depending on the player. Also congratulations for all involved in the Brute redesign, that was an incredibly successful overhaul of a fairly meh Halo 2 enemy.
I honestly never really knew just how complicated AI got in shooters. 

I always figured it was functions as simple as:

`"If In combat" -> "take cover and kill player" -otherwise-> "Patrol Area until player arrives"`

with auxiliary functions like `"close to vehicle -> get in vehicle"`. 

Knowing that there's this much to it honestly makes me want to replay the game and pay more attention to what each enemy is doing. 

Excellent video. This guy definitely just got a new viewer, can't wait to check out his other stuff. 
It'd be nice to see more of this, but i'd be surprised if this post gets much traction. 

Years ago when I joined this sub in it's early days, coming from /r/gaming, there was a lot more interesting discussion and content. Now it feels a lot more drama/rumor centric. 
Mark browns game analysis is good too
Unfortunately more of is hard, since the channel almost exclusively posts only on ganes they can talk to devs about or have already talkes about.
If you like this sort of technical and creative insight into games, I'd suggest checking out NoClip's work. They're doing some incredible stuff.
Not only that, this video is the prime example of one thing in which Halo 3 (honestly the whole trilogy) did better than most modern games: AI. The AI in Halo feels incredible, and I never seen such a flexible AI in modern shooter that can seamlessly change from a role to another, swap weapons, ride vehicles, act differently depending on which seat of the vehicle they're in (they can even drive for you), and all of these while also engaging in mid-scale battle with multiple allies and enemies.

Not to mention, Halo 4 and 5 promoted all that competitive bullcrap, while they should've been promoting the most unique part of the franchise: custom games. There is no other shooter that allowed you to create custom maps and custom modes with the depth even Halo 3 allowed. Players dumped HUNDREDS of hours on stupid gamemodes like Fat Zombie and Jenga Tower... And it was amazing!

Halo 5 is a pile of wasted potential, that's why I'm hoping they'll learn their lesson with the next title. One of the best things they could do is custom game cross play. 
Absolutely. Halo 3 is probably my favorite game of all time. Like it's actually astounding how good it is. 
As someone that hasn’t played much halo beyond the first 2 and loves couch multiplayer, would you say it holds up nowadays? I’ve been looking for a 4 player splitscreen shooter and I’m not a big fan of cod
Not only that, but the DLC that was released free'd up the previously released DLC, so you were getting a lot of free content, and microtransactions hadn't ruined the base game.
God damn you’re so right. I just got the master chief collection and that game holds up without even trying...and no “hd makeover” either. You can spend hours just dicking about with the ai systems, the physics, etc. I love halo 3, it will always have a place in my library.
Counterpoint: the story falls apart as soon as you start to actually think about it (edit: [article](http://haruspis.tumblr.com/post/89804205288/why-halo-3s-story-was-horsecock)), the gameplay felt sluggish with a very low FOV, and the hit detection online was rubbish.
Yeah, Halo 3 was the best.  I remember playing all the way through 4 at a launch party and having a pretty good time but not a great one.  I sat down a couple days later and played some 3 and realized that there was a lot missing from 4.
> 11 years later and Halo 5 removed couch co-op which essentially kills a lot of the essence that was Halo

Most people dont play couch co-op, even back then, you'd see more lone wolfs rather than people having guests attached to their profile. 

Halo 5 is still a great game, shit campaign, but on par multiplayer, maybe slightly worse than 3. But they finally added a server browser to Custom game. I would have killed for that back in Halo 3. It was painful to be locked out because the only lobby your friends were in was full (16 players).
Halo 3 was okay but in some respects was not as good as 1 and 2. It failed to get big traction and was overtaken by Call of Duty 4 (which revolutionized multiplayer FPS game design). So peak of gaming? Nah.
Piano at the beginning of Ocarina of Time?
Y'know every video I somehow manage to make one tiny mistake somewhere that bugs me forever afterwards.  I thought I'd got away with it this time and then... nope.  Sorry about that!
no i made this :)
Keep in mind that the AI for an FPS's campaign mode is meant to be and should be very different than how it works for a balanced RTS.
Halo Wars was hampered I think by being designed for console. I don't want to be PCMR or anything since there's plenty of games I prefer on console, but I think that the controller gameplay forced the game to be more strategy oriented. If the game had a fine unit control / micro layer to the gameplay it'd probably a lot more fun and more authentic to Halo, because Halo has never really been about two blobs of dudes just shooting each other other watching each other die. They'd always have a lot of strafing back and forth, rolling out of the way of each other's grenades, taking cover, and so forth that you could express with a micro layer. 

That said, /u/Avengerr said it best, Halo Wars is for people who want to see more of the Halo universe, not necessarily those who want Big-Big Team Battle between UNSC and Covvies.  


I had the same hope for halo wars. I wish it was common for games with goos mechanics and AI to have a dev/sandbox mode to create spawn points and choose enemy and pick ai patterns for a skirmish.

At least people seemed to enjoy Halo wars.
I don't think you know what the word sandbox means
It's sort of devolved into gaming news. 
Imagine the upvotes if the title mentioned EA or lootboxes
I don’t see the drama, but I also don’t read to far into the comments.
[I miss posts like this](https://np.reddit.com/r/gaming/comments/uxpil)
Hey, thanks for watching the video (that's my voice - and my words too).  My social tracker was telling me this video had a lot of traffic coming from Reddit.  I think I found the source! :)

Indeed you're correct videos are driven from actually sourced material: either existing talks or posts (such as both my [Halo 2](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NU717sd8oUc) and Halo 3 videos) and/or from actually interviewing developers who are happy to talk to me (my recent videos on [Spec Ops: The Line](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y--BgBOPduE) and [DOOM (2016)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RcOdtwioEfI) are a good example of this).  Simply put if I don't know for certain how it works, the video doesn't get made, which is a shame as there are some topics/games I've had to abandon over the years as I just could not find the info I needed to bring it all together.

Case studies typically appear once a month - I work as an AI researcher and freelance game AI programmer so this is my evening/weekend job/pet project.  Whilst I often keep topics close to my chest (my patreon supporters usually get a month or two heads-up), I do have some very exciting games lined up for the next 3-6 months.  One of which is my first legitimate 'exclusive' as I was invted to a AAA studio to see their AI systems for a title that was released earlier this year.
That's the kind of in depth content I'm after though, I'm happy to wait between posts as I know work is being put in.
I'm just glad that despite 343 promoting all their esports stuff, Forge mode is still improving with each iteration. I'd even say that the best part of Halo 5 is the Forge (and that Halo 5's Forge is the best so far), so it's still nice to see that 343 isn't throwing that aspect of Halo away.
The custom game environment for Halo 5 is more powerful than ever though. There is even a custom games browser and plans to add one to MCC. It won't be shocking at all to see similar support for Infinite with cross play. 
I don't know much about game design, and the industry always scared me because of the way employees are treated.  BUT, the one thing that's always called me to want to make a game is the desire for a wonderful game that blended the map editors of Timesplitters, Far Cry, and Halo: Forge. Far Cry 5 got soooo close with the frankly fucking amazing map editor, but shit the bed with 2 game modes (deathmatch and team deathmatch) and a god awful lobby browser system.  Just mix that in with the Halo Forge browser system and it's custom game mode stuff.

I just want to be able to mold the environment and add in custom inside level design, and have enough game modes to have crazy dumb fun for years.  Man, what I wouldn't do to have the Predator mode from Far Cry:Instincts Predator.

If there was one game I could wish into existence it'd be that.
> There is no other shooter that allowed you to create custom maps and custom modes with the depth even Halo 3 allowed. 

Umm ... Have you *seen* the stuff people are making in *Halo 5*'s forge? Or are you just running on the hate-train for karma/nostalgia?

Because people are making little *missions*. Not just maps, levels and game types, but *missions* with objectives and asymmetrical online play.

Switches that open doors, spawn units, turn off lights across a building ... Players are making some amazing stuff and better yet, the devs actually incorporate it into the online playlists in rotations to show off the coolest new modes and maps.

For Halloween it's freaking versus L4D in Halo, for example.
Can't say for Halo 4, but Halo 5 was where the kept "competitive" in mind from the start of creation.

I put quotes around competitive because the competitive community didn't like what they did, the casual audience felt alienated, and the Halo community ended up with a game that did not really cater to any audience, despite 343's claims.
If you want to see good AI play Arma.
Plenty of other shooters had that level or more of customiseability (PC games of then and before were built around user creations and modding in mind), Halo just reached a shit ton more players
With the name "Halo: Infinite", I'm really hoping that somehow ties into not only the story, but also the Forge and Custom Games modes. Maybe it'll have optional crossplay and a huge emphasis on sharing modes and them continually adding new pieces and features to Forge, kinda like a Halo platform for years to come. 

A man can dream. 
[deleted]
I replayed 2, 3, ODST, Reach and 4 with a friend recently. They all hold up and 3 was definitely the best. 
I'd think so.  I played so much of it as a kid with my friends that it was always very enjoyable.  I know for Halo 3 you can play the campaign with 4 players plus there's a lot to do if you connect to xbox live tho I can't speak for the XboxOne version.  I honestly wouldn't mind being able to play it with my wife now but not interested in buying a bunch of hardware to warrant the nostalgia.
Halo 3 is hands down the best splitscreen shooter ever made. Halo Reach is also fantastic in that regard.
There only one that was made free it its lifetime was the heroic pack (the first one)
Eeeeeeeeh lets not give Bungie improper credit. I was in Highschool when Halo 3 came out and it was a game I remember having to save up my own money for to buy (because my parents refused to buy Videogames for me).

When the first DLC Map Pack came out, they took away literally THE ONLY playlist that I played. Big Team Battle (8 v 8 with vehicles) was locked behind the Map Pack, you couldn't play it without. It made me drop the game pretty quickly with a bad sour taste in my mouth.

Every time Bungie does something shady with microtransactions and or DLC Pricing in Destiny (Hint: They do it A LOT) I am still reminded of this. Having a game I paid 60 dollars for to play Big Team Battle, and then having that Big Team Battle taken away from me...
"A lot" defined here as "1 map, followed by the first of two map packs if you bought the second one."

Except you had to buy the first or get locked out of some playlists.

Then again the rage about "microtransactions ruining the base game" says that you're both just griping at little and probably didn't play much of any *Halo* online either.
"A lot" defined here as "1 map, followed by the first of two map packs if you bought the second one."

Except you had to buy the first or get locked out of some playlists.

Then again the rage about "microtransactions ruining the base game" says that you're both just griping at little and probably didn't play much of any *Halo* online either.
yup. sounds like this guy didnt play halo 2 when it came to hit detection. the BR spread in H3 was abysmal. but i did like the spawn system somewhat better though
A LOT of people here have nostalgia goggles on. And I say that as someone who still plays MCC every few weeks
>It failed to get big traction

lmao it averaged 200k concurrent players for the first two years

Are you old enough to remember Halo 3? Or rather, did you even play Halo 3?
It definitely did not fail to get big traction. At 13 million copies sold it helped sell millions of consoles and gave the 360 a huge starting lead last gen. It also was able to maintain hundreds of thousands of concurrent peak player count for up to 3 years after its release. Halo's downfall only really started with Halo 4.
We've never really seen an RTS where each unit was a unit engaging in FPS behavior, not to my knowledge. It would be new and pretty wild, but the computing requirements would be pretty nutty I bet. 
It's a sandbox, but not an open-world sandbox. You can have open-world games with linear objectives and railroaded toolsets, and vice-versa.

A good half of levels like The Silent Cartographer (I've played a lot more of Halo 1 than 3) are sandbox-style arenas chained together. You're given a few tools and an immediate objective and otherwise given free reign to fight the way you want. No corridors or forced weaponry.
Something like this might honestly be more likely to generate interest in r/gamedev
Honestly I’ll take the trade off since it’s meant a bit more positivity in this sub. How negative and cynical this sub was especially compared to now was really unbearable.
Forge is improving in its complexity and what you cna do... but...

Halo 5 textures, lighting and objects look HORRENDOUS in forge. Compare halo 5 forged maps, and their overall look and feel to halo 3. 

It’s laughable. Halo 3 forge maps look amazing, while h5 look like 2002 games... :( 


The custom game support was a way too late in the games life. 
Didn't mean to write the 3, I meant in general. The Forge in Halo 5 is amazing and should be promoted more by the devs (I hate how Halo: Forge on PC had such a silent release)
Yeah but the incorporated that stuff into Reach, sure the forge is good now but it's 3 years on from a game with good gunplay and bad mechanics that takes up 100gb of your Xbox. Not worth it at all.
Not with an internal editor. Far Cry is the closest, maybe. 
Halo “infinite” describes its expected lifetime: infinite.

It’s a service. A game as a service. 


2009-2014 (Minecraft marks the start of this, and rightly so, the flood  (no pun intended) of Early Access zombie survival games was the end) was the golden age for Indie IMO, it's still good but then it was awesome
Ah well, I'm 26 and while fortnite isn't my thing I don't take issue with it. It must be pretty fun since so many people play it. 
Honestly think that if Halo 3 were released today it'd be a phenomenon again
Does it have firefight? That mode sounds like a lot of fun to me. Also, can you add bots?
It just sucks that you can’t add bots :/ I remember spending hours playing matches of Timesplitters with my friends and bots 
They also released the Chill Out remake, Cold Storage, for free.

Of course, if you wanted to play it in matchmaking at the time, you needed to purchase the Legendary Map Pack for 800 Microsoft Points (fuck those points).
Thanks Don Mattrick! :/
You are wrong the heroic map pack is interesting really. Bungie in 2007 was a small group of talented developers that just wanted to make a great game, the executive BS you see these days is not the same company. The DLC costed money at release, and was publicly said to be free that spring. DLC playlists were added, nothing was removed (at least due to DLC, playlists were pretty dynamic)

&#x200B;

Halo 3 did have DLC locks eventually but that was not really a big factor until they made ODST which came with all Halo 3 DLC.

&#x200B;

I went online with Halo 3 March 3 08, and I did not get the Heroic pack until it was free, and guess what when I first started playing all I played was BTB.  Literally first thing I fired up, I remember it fondly. If you are going to shit on old Bungie at least get your facts straight.
[removed]
Nah, Halo's downfall started with a combination of Reach and MMS taking off via CoD 4. Yearly game releases became a thing and Halo was never that. 
>We've never really seen an RTS where each unit was a unit engaging in FPS behavior, not to my knowledge. It would be new and pretty wild, but the computing requirements would be pretty nutty I bet. 

Men of War comes very close to fitting the definition. Assault Squad is great if you wanna check it out.


That's my understanding as well. FPS games just have less AI than RTS games so they can have smarter logic for each of them individually.

You also want it to be more strategic and predictable in an RTS. If your units are too smart, it's not fun for you to control and if your enemies are too unpredictable, it's too hard or annoying to be prepared.
Company of heroes springs to mind, the way squads shoot at each other and use cover.
[deleted]
That doesn't make it a sandbox
/r/truegaming fills a gaming discussion void sometimes. has been awhile since I've been on there though.
I hope that with Xbox now able to haves mods and things like that for Bethesda games that they input something like this for Halo Infinite so you could add your own textures and things to forge so everything doesn't look so samey. I doubt it will happen though. 
Three months after the game's release was "way too late" for you, huh? I feel sorry for you with an attention span that short.
That's kind of what I mean. I hope that's the case, if done well that could mean endless Halo content! 
Halo 3 ODST does and I believe the game came with Halo 3 multiplayer on a second disk.  You are unable to add friendly bots but with Firefight mode you can go 1 v all the enemies ha

Reach has this as well I just didn't care for all the new elements Reach added; felt very COD like.
holly shit I totally forgot about those points. That takes me back.

I remember map packs were always 800 points but you could only buy points in increments of 500 or 1000 so you always had some left over.
I do have my facts straight. I remember trying to play BTB and it saying "You do not have all the maps for this playlist."
>Bungie in 2007 was a small group of talented developers that just wanted to make a great game, 

Is that why Jason Jones checked out during development?  Bungie was not "small" in 2007. MS had just bought them a giant new office to fit the huge influx of people for Halo 3 (May. They were already tired of Halo and the senior people were basically looking forward to Destiny.

Edit: You replied and deleted while I was responding, but you are right, Maybe MS didn't "buy" the building. However, the move to the new building was done prior to the split from MS, while Bungie was still owned by them. They also needed a new building to fit the team, which was large at the time. It wasn't some small group of handpicked devs completing a passion project like you make it seem.
That isn't a reliable source, considering that they think branching narratives are an example of emergent gameplay.
That same page you linked states:

> A sandbox game is also known as an open-world or free-roaming game.

Which I would say isn't true when you look at some open world games such as Witcher 3. The terms aren't interchangeable.

I'd agree that Halo's campaign itself might not qualify as a sandbox, but the custom games sure do.
We're getting downvoted for pointing out the obvious. Halo has always been linear not a sandbox, this comment section is full of idiots.
/r/truegaming has a bit of a track record of focusing on discussing and not debate though. It’s pretty frequent that I’ll go into a comment thread and say something like “I overall agree with the discussion going on, but there can be exceptions like X” or “there are still issues with Y, so I understand the concern and think the opinions are valid” only to get downvoted almost exclusively. They seem to like discussion as long as everyone agrees, which still isn’t what I want out of a good subreddit.
People may also enjoy /r/VideoGameAnalysis 
Well it’s be fine if they had ACTUAL good textures, and allowed us to tweak some settings, such as scaling, size, diffuse color, noise, luster, ambient lighting, etx. 
Three months? Custom games didnt get good support until nearly a year after launch. If you're referring to them adding janky and broken assault, griffball, ctf, oddball, and king of the hill, then you're not talking about the right time frame. 
I really don’t want this...

I want a SOLID release every 4 years. 

I don’t want to be milked for drip fed content. I don’t want grindy systems, simply designed to lengthen content longevity, simply to give a small amount of content to grind. 

Games as a service are simply not as content rich, fully featured, or complete packages, compared to a full release. 

They just make more money by drip feeding content... 
Ok thanks for the tips, appreciate you!
If you had to use Microsoft Points on another third party currency which left you even more change it was frustrating as hell
That is not true MS points were sold at 1600 and 4000 respectively. 

You buy a map pack and you are left with $10 (800 MS points)...

&#x200B;

The system works fine for MSRP stuff, it is when you add deals and other small purchases to the equation. Once you break the multiples of $5 that is when the store became a massive headache, as the store grew the worse standardized prizing got. By the time the end of the MS point era came you had indies for $15, xda for as low as $1, you had avatar stuff, gamerpics, and a vastly growing store front with constant sales.
Look man if you want I can dig up the details, 

Halo heroic map pack was a planned free piece of content that was restricted to DLC playlists when it launch that winter at premium price. 

you are wrong, sorry. 
I'd agree that the forge mode is a sandbox but stating that the campaign is sandbox is ridiculous.
Your problem is that you think sandbox means it HAS to be an open world game like Red Dead or Assassin's Creed, when it really means a type of gameplay design that doesn't restrict the players choices on how to tackle problems presetened to them. And how the player, gameplay systems, and AI can interact with each other in a number of different ways. Game design like that isn't restricted to open world games. Halo has a series of levels, mechanics, and even a whole spin off game based around these design principals.
> this comment section is full of idiots

Here are two in fact!
> They seem to like discussion as long as everyone agrees, which still isn’t what I want out of a good subreddit.

It is tough to maintain a community like that. Most folk on reddit are not "intellectuals" and aren't able to divorce themselves from their personal feelings or understand the framework of a discussion. You can't really do objective discussions about things when people aren't willing to treat it academically/impartially. It doesn't help that reddit "empowers" folks to believe that their opinion is worth the same as anyone else's opinion by giving them the ability to up/downvote content regardless of how informed/objective it is or isn't. 

So far my favorite place to talk about games is over at /r/patientgamers though. Folks who are willing to wait for games and aren't as invested in those franchises are usually willing to be a bit more impartial about them. That's a sad bit of Witcher 3 and Dark Souls circlejerking from time to time, but honestly that's almost inescapable in general so you take what you can get. 

No, I'm talking about forge and custom games, which released December the year the game came out, under three months from the release date.
Yes and no.

Early on in the Xbox 360's lifecycle if you were buying MS points with a credit card you could only do so in 500 or 1000 point increments, the cards were always 1600 or 4000. It took them until 2010 or so to change the credit card purchases to reflect the card ones.
[Post from 2010](https://www.bungie.net/en-US/Forums/Post/2261632) where people are telling this guy he needs all the DLCs to play Social Big Team Battle.
The campaign is definitely several sandboxes
By your definition then a huge percentage of games are sandboxes which ridiculous. Search for the sandbox tag on steam and see what you games you get.
But most of the time when people write something negative about witcher or dark souls they don't get downvoted into oblivion. I really like how accepting the community is of other's opinions. One of my favourite subs overall, my only problem is that discussions tend to repeat.
The thing is, the game didn't have enough sustainability to last 3 months imo.  You completed the campaign in a few hours, never went back to it because it's an awful campaign, then went and played one of the few modes on multiplayer (there were 5 on release, 5). All of which were competitive, I don't mind comp, it's fun from time to time but it was always tryhards, there was no just social slayer where you can mess about for a bit, challenge yourself by only using the magnum or something.

There was that warmode though right? Yeah well that mode sucked, between the shitty ai and the lootboxes, and the 3 maps on release, it got boring fast.

After a month (generous I know), you'd done everything. It was only months later when it started to get a few more maps, modes etc and finally forge but by then it was too little too late
Soyou're talking about when the custom games came out with none of those game modes. When it was still barebones.     
Custom games and forge not being in the game on release as they should have been.    
That isn't custom games support to brag about. A year after release when the custom games were finally robust is when to brag about. Also, custom games servers were not implemented until much later than 3 months. 
>When the first DLC Map Pack came out, they took away literally THE ONLY playlist that I played.

You give me something from a time unrelated to your post....

&#x200B;

As I said you are wrong....
I can claim things that make no sense too. HEY GUYS CALL OF DUTY IS THE BEST INDIE PUZZLE ADVENTURE FRANCHISE EVER MADE, PROVE ME WRONG! See?
There's difference between a sandbox game and a sandbox. I would consider a sandbox game to be an open world game. A sandbox within a game is a space that allows for creativity and improvisation. A good example would be something like Half Life 2 where you have a sort of sandbox where you can play around with the physics and mechanics of the game like you can in a Halo game.
*Whistles* Howdy! Now isn't that a fine amount of goalpost moving! You'd think it was a kid's soccer league there!
My point is that Bungie has a history of locking people out of content they had at launch, regardless of the timeline. 
Have you played Halo
Or Hitman, which has a bunch of sandboxes connected with a linear story and progression.
Lmao tetris and pac man are sandbox games then
Fucking 343i defense team.

Halo 5 is trash and always will be. 3 months is way too late and nobody is going to stick around waiting for features to be added that should have been there since launch. I dont buy a steak to have half of it come after I finish the first half. 
Your point is irrelevant when your reasoning is wrong....
A billion times, you?
Yeah that's another really good example.
Wow. You have issues. It takes a disturbed individual to look at someone caught in a lie and go "Yeah, well ... they're right anyway because I like what they say!"

You must have voted last election.
Hes not wrong though 
Yeah man, we just disagree on what sandbox means. I think calling Halo linear is kinda misleading, each scenario is ripe for being played around with.
Making something deeper than it is? Youre way overthinking shit about a video game. Did I offend you that much? Relax bronie.
Perhaps you both are daff, I literally used his quote about how when the first DLC came out BTB became locked behind it. He was wrong, and his way to identify his claim was from a post 3 years after the map pack came out. 

Sorry you guys have poor comprehension skills.
Just because you can engage things in different ways doesn't make it a sandbox dude. The same way that World of Warcraft isn't a sandbox either, it's called a theme park MMO because of how on rails the gameplay is. And something like Eve Online or Minecraft are sandbox because of the amount of freedom and lack of objectives. 
How was he wrong?
https://youtu.be/iHSs3pjuyug 

At 6:22 even one of Halos developers calls it a sandbox game. There's a whole boat load of these developer diaries from Bungie and I can recall them using the term "sanbox" to describe their gameplay systems a few times besides this video. 

Edit: again, at 5:59 in that same video, they have a developer with the title of "Lead Sandbox Designer"

Wow once again

He said 

BTB was unplayable for those without DLC when the first map released, and he is wrong. 

BTB had no such thing until shortly after Halo 3 ODST which came out at the end of 2009. 

It is a wrong point of reference, and the argument really does not hold if you use the right point of reference which would have been along the lines of 

I played Halo 3 before it got DLC and when I fired it up 3 years later after multiple revisions I could not play BTB. It is quite the different story. 

Ultimately someone is trying to throw people under the bus based on false information, I get it Bungie sucks now, but if you want to attack them for breathing life into a dying game 2-3 years after it came in out and asking for your money in the process you can just GTFO. 

You had people that charge $15 a month and $60 a year for GaaS games, and we want to be up in arms over requiring you to spend maybe like $60 after years of free support  to refresh a game. Things were different than Halo 3 is a prime example of paid DLC problems in the way you would not think. It did not split a community, it just added $10 playlists with new maps people played for a week or two. It is safer to say map packs were a waster of money and added nothing to the base experience of the game

The game had three core alterations

1) Base release game 

2) Heroic map being free

3) Halo 3 ODST - when all content became universal and required money. 

Halo 3 after ODST was a new behemoth with maps for your maps in all playlists. I played Halo 3 for years, and if some run of a mill Joe who fires Halo 3 up after not playing it for 2-3 years wants to get his panties in a bunch that is his problem. I needed the 'expansion' that was integrating all DLC into the core experience. 

Paid MP DLCs are a joke, because despite what people say they are not paywalls they are broken promises for those actually willing to pay for more. Only game series that did not have this problem was BF, but it had a plethora of other paid DLC problems. 

TL;DR

I played Halo 3 for 3+years regularly and bought 4 map packs and then ODST, and I can tell you first hand Halo 3 never locked the core modes behind DLC paywalls until they made a standardized rerelease in the form of ODST, which was 2+ years after the game launched well after the first DLC as OP claims.
