F.E.A.R, while its quite old, the enemy AI still holds up as they employ smart flank and rush tactics to flush you out of cover.
I am thinking rain world just because ai ecosystem is out of this world, also am thinking starsector coz fvck them ai ships
Alien: Isolation

The whole game is a survival horror masterpiece. That fucking Xenomorph has such an AI that has been praised for years and other devs have tried to replicate it without success.

Here’s a video example, bit of spoilers ahead just in case:

[Revisiting the AI of Alien: Isolation](https://youtu.be/P7d5lF6U0eQ)
F.E.A.R.

https://www.rockpapershotgun.com/why-fears-ai-is-still-the-best-in-first-person-shooters
The Last of Us Part II  
Alien: Isolation  
Dishonored 2
Metal gear solid 5
The enemies in Metal Gear Solid V
Last of Us 2 probably has the best I’ve ever seen. Enemies hunt you down like real people. 

Alien Isolation, as well. The xenomorph has jump scared me so many times
Alien isolation has probably the smartes AI. The alien chnages tactics. It catches on to your tricks. For example a noise maker device used for distracting the alien to a distant location works in the early game. But as the game goes on it ignores the noise maker and if you keep using it the aluen starts to run in the opposite direction on the noise maker which is where the player would be. Clever girl.
Rain World. People dedicate hours in it just to observe the AI. 😊
Some games with great enemy AI:

* MetalGearSolid V
* Generation Zero
* Sniper Elite 5
* Ghost Recon Wildlands

In all three the enemy AI communicate, will spread out, flank, use cover, use sound in addition to LOS to locate you, snipe from great distance, use mortars, grenades, rockets, and melee weapons, run away when attacked if they don't have a fix on you location, and have somewhat randomized patrol routes and spawn locations.

All four are single player with the option for co-oop play.
I’ve heard Alien Isolation has good AI if you like horror
S.T.A.L.K.E.R. Enemies will suppress your last known position, fall back and try to flank you. The mutants hunt in unique ways and they can been seen hunting eachother and other stalkers. AI stalkers live out their own lives in the zone outside of your influence. Great AI
I didn't play the **Halo series**, but my friend did and he won't stop talking about that exactly: how the single-player enemies would be smart to react appropriately to what you do.
Mount and Blade. The ai isn’t super smart, but it will keep troops in formation, flank with cavalry, hold strategic positions, and utilise siege weaponry. As for having teammates, it’s your army versus theirs, you’re commanding your own troops and fighting alongside them, and once you have companions you can make them command your troops instead.
S.T.A.L.K.E.R is what you need, the AI is pretty good at flanking around and taking you out especially at max difficulty where both of you are able to take each other out with one or two bullets.
Good ole chess
When I hear smart ai the first 2 games I think of are Alien Isolation & Black & White: 2. Black and white is an RTS game though and I don't think you can even obtain a legal copy of it anymore or run it on anything modern.   


Some sandbox games have some pretty impressive AI but less so for their combat ai. Like Red Dead: 2, Grand theft auto: 5 and Modded Skyrim. (Hell even vanilla skyrim has the npc's living their own lives which is pretty cool)
HOLY SHIT OP I NEED YOU TO SEE THIS. It’s perfect for you lol 

Play *Will you Snail?*

The AI is genius, and tries to predict your movements. It also mocks you when you fail. All around fantastic experience. And the AI is super smart.
Rainworld. Any other answer is wrong.
Ground Branch has some of the most realistic AI known to video game history, it’s a co-op shooter where the objective is to take out terrorist in a wide verity of maps. The AI is super smart and (depending on the difficulty) will act like real people. Every step you make they can hear even from long distances which is very realistic. I find this one of the best realistic shooter games just because of the AI. By the way if you intend on getting this game check the hardware requirements first and update your graphics driver before playing.
The enemy AI in The Forest is great.
God Eater 3 

Code Vein
You'll have to go back to the 2000s,the last games had any kind of challenge
ShatterLine. In Coop mode has enemy soliders that move exactly as you describe. Free on Steam.
Try Gears Of War 4 & 5 really good AI. Made me think the longer i played it, the enemies were learning my patterns.
FEAR

The Division 2

Unreal tournament 2k4
every good shooter should have the things you listed, i suggest destiny 2 or division 2.

they are solely about fighting mixed groups of these enemy types.
Some really smart people created a real AI bot with machine learning for rocket league. It's called nexto it's not exactly what you're looking for but interesting for people into game ai
You said you're burned out on strategy games, but unfortunately, that's what I have.

AI War: Fleet Command is an RTS inspired by Supreme Commander that can only be played multiplayer in co-op, because the AI is good. Very good. As in "if you beat the AI at maximum difficulty, the developers consider it a bug" good. There's a sequel that is a little different, but still good from what I hear. I haven't played too much of it.
Metal Gear Solid 2.
SWAT 4. You play the leader of a SWAT force. Your enemies will hide behind doors, rush you if you're exposed, etc. You have to be very methodical if you want you and your team to survive and also follow police procedures. There's no saving, and enemy/civilian locations will change each time you play a mission.

It's a bit old, but still worth it. I suggest the fourth have specifically because it is the most immersive. Unlike its predecessors, this one was developed by the developers of Bioshock.
FEAR
Halo infinite
Metal gear solid 5. The enemies will put on helmets if you get too many headshots. They will use flashlights if you attack bases commonly during night. They will wear gas masks if you use smoke grenades a lot. They will also not run directly towards gun fire.
back4blood the bots are really good, its sort of horde shooter so the enemy AI isn't really smart
Not sure but maybe halo firefight
Far Cry 2 + Redux mod on redux difficulty.
Sons of the forest
Guild Wars. The first one. Enemy AI actually work in groups against you and even use formation. They even make judgment calls about remaining in your AOE if they think they might be able to kill you first or getting out of them. They also can use their skills in combination with each other.
Army of Two
Death Stranding but I’d call it more of a smart immersive environment as opposed to necessarily any real “enemies”…
Halo Infinites ai is really advanced while playing forge firefight they use flank strategies and end up overwhelming me and my friends
adding on to this, there's a free demo on steam of the upcoming game Trepang 2, which seems to try to capture the same magic (as far as combat goes, it's not a horror title afaik). 

I had good fun with the demo and I feel I can recommend it to anyone who liked FEAR.
Fear still holds up nowadays on AI aswell
I second this. The best strat against those clones is to keep moving and check your back often.
[redacted] is smarter than mee I swear.
I second Rainworld, especially scavengers.
Its interesting because the AI there isn't really that sophisticated.

It basically boils down to:

\- Decision tree of the type used in every other AAA game ever with the caveat that certain paths in the tree get activated if the player has managed to avoid getting killed by the Xenomorph in certain ways. (gives the illusion of learning but its really just a hardcoded 'only allow this to happen N times before going down a better path')

\- Make sure the alien is vaguely in the same general area as the player

There are no fancy neural networks or new technologies here, they just did a better job of writing their decision trees than other games.
The Last of Us Part II has tremendously good ai. Plus, different enemy groups and types will have hugely different playstyles. Some groups are really aggressive, others employ more tactics and slowly flank in. Even when not actively fighting, the ai is great at reacting to the environment, commenting on traps and dead allies.
Added bonus of the AI generally behaving more believably and *NOT* getting a permanent GPS fix on you once you enter combat. I love that you can actually reliably flee or cat-and-mouse if you can break line of sight, and they'll search for you where they last saw you instead of just homing in on your real time location.
I've never played a single player game that had the balls to let an NPC shoot you in the face from 20 yards away within a second of establishing line of sight. One of the most challenging experiences I ever had. I heard they cut enemies that could sneak up on you unfortunately because players never notices them until it was too late.
I'm been obsessed with this game for a year now. The AI is indeed fascinating
I second Sniper Elite 5. I've had times where I could reliably work with the AI to flank an enemy sniper in VS mode.
Sorry man, the AI in WL is garbage. Aimbots, hivemind, never reloading their weapons, going in straight line, guys with uzis that can snipe you with no recoil. Breakpoint made them way more realistic.
There are A couple of S.T.A.L.K.E.R. games on steam, which one has this? Or is it all of them?
I find a bit hit and miss but when when its's good it's really good.
Weird, even with the AI on high settings for me on ground branch they don’t behave smartly. Ready or not does AI better than ground branch
Great game but AI is not that kind of smart op is looking for
What's smart about Code Vein's AI?
Yes to Unreal Tournament 2k4!  That is one game I still keep on every computer I own.  Loads of content, always a fun time.  :)
The screenshots look very much like the game is in the same alley as fear, will check it out :)
Didn't they already do that in MGS1 ? I remember them doing that
Agreed! 😊
All of them, though I think its shown the best in the first two (Shadow of Chernobyl and Clear Sky) though Call of Pripyat has the best AI overall.
Checkout Stalker Anomaly too.  It's a free game built on a custom engine based on the Stalker engine.  Everyone will say to start with SOC, but definitely keep Anomaly on your radar as something to graduate to.

The Stalker series has its own subreddit, I recommend checking that out.  The original games work on modern system, but there is a baseline community patch for each that fixes tons of bugs and/or adds QOL features.  (like ZRP for SOC)

Stalker uses something called A-Life which is like an grand AI director that connects all AI from every region, so even when you're not around, the AI is still doing stuff.

When you combo this and how the AI fights with mods, they become some of the best AI around.  Like, literally sneaking around cover to attack and whatnot.  They'll do this stuff in the vanilla game, but stuff like Anomaly makes it feel like real encounters.

I also recommend the game F.E.A.R.  The AI in that uses something called GOAP, the "Goal Oriented Action Planning system".  You can watch stuff about it, but it makes the encounters with the AI combatants feel organic.
Yeah, I'll take an advanced AI which is occasionally very dumb over an ai that just sits in cover all day.
The team mate AI is decent in RoN also, if you wanna play solo
The companion AI is fantastic
I'm late to the MGS party and haven't played the other MGS games, but you're right that it's definitely not a new concept. That said, AFAIK it's still rare for games with stealth mechanics to implement them well enough that running and hiding feels viable after detection. A lot of action games just tack on stealth as an afterthought.
