I don’t play games where the point remotely lays in having full conversations where I as the player have to initiate fully formed questions and statements, and if I did (VN, point and click, etc), I would prefer a bespoke and curated experience, story and dialogue. But hey- that’s me. I can’t speak for others. I just see it as a “bells and whistles” sort of application to most current forms of gaming, and can’t see it as anything but a distraction in any kind of game where the point isn’t to test the conversational capabilities of a non-human conversationalist. 

I have to admit- it would be kinda funny to ask Zoltan in Witcher 3 for example how to make a soufflé just to see what he comes up with in his voice and affectation, but again- I’d show it to 3 friends who would only find it impressive if they hadn’t seen it before I showed it to them, we’d all agree that it was cool and advanced, and then I’d go back to wanting Zoltan to help me figure out who Dandelion was boning so we could track his whereabouts.
A game just released during the 2023 gamejam called "Detective GPT" which integrates the AI pretty well. It's crude, but a good first step.
[AI powered NPC dialog is already being worked on](https://youtu.be/jH-6-ZIgmKY), but believable NPC dialog is still probably a few years away. This kind of tech is super promising and can really add so much to role playing in games.
What I'd like to know is why all these discussion threads get donvoted to oblivion. I wanna hear the discussions about it.
Its got some hurdles to overcome. It took a week, maybe 2, for that Twitch show "Nothing Forever"  to get banned because it started to make transphobic jokes. No developer or publisher is gonna want to put something into a game where they can't control what is going to be said.

I would imagine as soon as a major game implements this the various Ratings Boards across the world will probably crack down on it. So the only games that would get something like this are games that are already aiming for a mature audience.
I don't think many people wanna manually input dialogue to talk to NPCs. It seems tedious to do so. Could work well for a Visual Novel or text adventure tho. Wouldn't be a lotta fun to have to contribute a lotta effort into talking to random NPCs in a RPG. I would like to see more life brought towards them tho. It helps make the world feel alive when they react to occurrences that happen in the game. I like talking to NPCs in Dragon Quest because of that.
I got a lot of joy out of npc to npc conversations in Oblivion, I imagine AI is probably already pretty good at simulating something similar. The question is, if the novelty would wear off if multiple games are doing it/we're more aware of the background process.
Todd Howard has been talking a bit about it in his Interview with Lex Friedman. 
Pretty interesting stuff. 
This will most certainly be a reality in a few years imo.
I really don't want this in games. 

In almost every regard, I would always prefer human written dialogue and story telling. AI just can't match human emotion and storytelling. If that results in less dialogue, then that's a sacrifice I'm willing to make for quality.
I think implementing such an ai would only work in online games, as the best on device AI we have is still Siri
What would an AI be able to accomplish in the field of NPC chatter that wouldn't be better suited to a human?. In my experience an NPC has to say very specific things or else what is even the point of it existing? 

For example, say it's an inconsequential NPC in a town of an RPG. What information would you possible have to gain from them that isn't already solved by manual text? Is there a risk that an AI wouldn't understand what the player should or shouldn't know already and inadvertently give away plot points? Or would it perhaps just drone on and on about pointless information that doesn't even line up with another NPCs text, or maybe even conflict with the overarching plot or world building?

AI isn't really Intelligent, it's more akin to very complex algorithms than another human mind. And if it does cross that threshold, isn't it very inhumane to expect that we can make them slaves to our whims of creativity?
in order for this to be not just a gimmick it needs to be just one aspect of the super NPC AI. Each NPC would need to be able to do three things 

1.  have goals, likes, dislikes and the ability to change these things overtime.
2.  be able to acknowledge the changes in their world and voice an opinion on them.
3. have ability and initiative to affect the world outside of the player's influence.

throw in something that makes each NPC even more unique, like say letting each one develop an entirely original type of magic based on who they are and their past experiences and you've got a truly living breathing world who's population and landscape will shift and warp as power hungry mages ascend to lichdom only to be felled by heroes who rose to the call when their villages were destroyed and all of it without the player doing anything.
I'm wondering if next gen consoles would have an integrated AI chip and use it to enhance reactivity and how NPCs and the like could react to the player. It doesn't have to be used for any real or central purpose, but general world building and reactivity.
Well as a game developer I am certainly thinking of how to work towards more interesting NPC AI with a transformer! Just in my hobby time. I might then actually encounter NPC interactions in my own game that surprise me and make the world that I create even more alive.

And I'm not at all worried about the AI doing anything like taking over, or being scary or something. It's still my storytelling, but then smartly mixed. Very much like an interpolation machine, between multiple text options that I taught it. I like it!
unreal engine integration with live AI chat: [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h4Vr-n0XNdg](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h4Vr-n0XNdg)

Not 10 years away.
[deleted]
Well said!
[deleted]
And it will be probably as shitty and generic as their ai generated quests.
[deleted]
There is probably room for both. In some games it could be interesting, in others full designed and scripted events work better.     


Imagine a procedural games like No Mans Sky... but with tons of full interactive NPCs that can assigned story driven quests.
I could see this being really fantastic for a game like No Mans Sky, where everything is already procedurally generated outside of a few things.
Fully procedural entertainment is an inevitability I also don’t want to race toward.
Writing will never go away, but i can see it being implemented to fill in gaps rather than replace the main writers.

If you want to fill a world with NPC's there's only so much a writing team can do before you have to have NPC's either constantly repeating themselves, or you have to limit the amount of NPC's in your game. With chat AI you could expand this significantly.

Look at it this way: Developers already make use of procedural tech when creating large landmasses, however they still determine its general design and they still fill in critical details in main locations. I think chat AI could be used the same way. The writers can focus on writing the main story and main characters, give a decent amount of side characters some dialogue, and let the less important NPC's be handled by a chat AI.

One example would be a game like Cyberpunk 2077: You have the main and side quests fully handled by the main writing team, but there's tons and tons of NPC's which are basically identical and only say 2-3 lines. Let a chat AI handle those to give it more variety and depth (assuming halfway decent voice synthesis would also be available). In that game it'd even be kind of thematic too :P

Chat AI will never replace human writers, but in this way i think it'd add a bit of life to certain kinds of games (mostly large open world rpg's) . That said, it'll be 5 to 10 years *at least* until this becomes viable, maybe longer. What we have now is still incredibly crude.
>I really don't want this in games. 
>
>In almost every regard, I would always prefer human written dialogue and story telling. AI just can't match human emotion and storytelling. If that results in less dialogue, then that's a sacrifice I'm willing to make for quality.

You don't see it ever improving? This is great. Especially in open world RPGs where the voice acting always sucks, and is expensive to do well with massive amounts of audio bulking up the game size.
This honestly just a pretty naïve take.
Artificial Intelligence will get better and will at some point be functionally indistinguishable from human writing. 
You "wanting" human written dialogue is purely based on emotional biases.
That's generally a device problem though. Since most handheld devices don't have the processing power to run a good AI.

OPs idea in theory is actually doable right now. The problem would be implementing it into a game, without the user needing a top of the line PC and having 5minute loading times per response.
The advancement is say you have a game like Cyberpunk or GTA where NPCs are just fodder that occasionally say weird phrases.  

Theoretically if they AI was good enough you could automate full in the moment conversations with these NPCs. Hell you might even be able to automate full mini quests.  

I think for some types of games this would work well (games that try to build fully immersive worlds), for others it would be unnecessary.
Spoken like someone who literally has no idea about how any of that works lol
You had me till that last sentence.  I fully believe that we will get to a point where AI is creating games (barring legislation preventing that) but the full extent of what you're suggesting is more than 10 years away.  There's definitely a market for it though, if a company like EA could lay off its studio's workforces and just have executives/writers along with an IT department to maintain their AI farms I can definitely see it happening.  

I guess the real proof of concept would be to see if Chat GPT can write a program to generate something like a text based adventure game.  I've never been able to get through the queue to actually generate something and I don't have the time right now.
By my reckoning, large language models are too unreliable for important work, too quickly outdated for internet search, too expensive to generate for personal projects... but they may actually make sense for use as toys and games. It's unfortunate that their position as the last, desperate hope for investors trying to catch the "next big thing" might make them poisonous to the one market they might be useful to.
But this is actually good.
At firat sure.
But I think in a few decades this will have developed to a point where we can't imagine it any other way.
Classic Todd, just looking out for the people. He always knows what we really want.
Writing is one of those things I DON'T want generated. 

I don't truly believe AI chats in video games would maintain any believable conversation. I tried to talk to one of those AI bots that pretend to be characters. I thought I was gonna talk to Master Chief, instead within 5 minutes the bot had broken down so bad it literally morphed into believing it was a 16 year old autistic girl from the UK who didn't know what Halo was. I made Paul Atreides believe his dad was alive and was a huge fan of 22 Jump Street. Sure, it's endless conversations, but it's mostly nonsense and it wouldn't work in a game with established lore and settings and stories when you can just talk an AI into believing something. 

I sincerely don't believe that tech can do anything better then a human writer. Human writers can put emotion into their dialogue and stories, meaning and purpose. AI can't do that. Procedurally generating a level makes sense in some games, especially NMS where it's all about exploring an endless universe. But every single time, I will always prefer a human writer who can write something interesting and compelling, rather then an AI that MIGHT be able to string together a few sentences but inevitably break down and fall back on generic responses.
That’s what I’m saying though. I could be wrong but afaik chat GPT only runs off online servers right now, and it’s still too slow to use in a game. We still need another few generations of CPU upgrades for it to make sense to implement in offline games on consoles/PC, and we at least improvements in networking infrastructure to make it viable via online processing. Sure it’s “doable” now but not in any capacity that really matters.
Exactly this. It would be very beneficial for open world games to make it seem believable. Not just in a conversation sense but the npc ai as well. Instead of just having an npc stand around grumbling the same couple phrases as you walk by, they could pull out conversations based on things they saw, heard, know about the player etc. Some npc already do this to an extent in some games, where they will make a comment about something the player has done previously. The difference is the devs wouldn't have to manually program these interactions for each npc they want them to occur with. It could go way more in depth than that.

>I guess the real proof of concept would be to see if Chat GPT can write a program to generate something like a text based adventure game.  I've never been able to get through the queue to actually generate something and I don't have the time right now.

I'm not even sure that at some point in the future the AI needs to write a program for making a game. Rather the program would be implicit in it's training weights.

It's like right now we are using a lot of fancy algorithms in a game engine to create lifelike visuals. We're calculating how the polygons are moving, how they are oriented with respect to the camera and light sources, where they would be projected onto the screen etc. pp.
On the other hand, image generation AIs don't do any of that, instead they just immediately draw the pixels in a way that they have learned what photos and drawings look like.


So maybe at some point in the future you don't need an AI that writes game logic but rather an AI that has learned how to draw images and update the next one in the sequence based on player input etc.

This is obviously not 2 years away but I'm curious if our outlook on how to use AI changes as the tech gets more widespread and we get used to it (think about how the first cars basically looked like horse carriages because that's what people had in their mind for transportation and it's what workshops were already comfortable building).
a decade at most, probably closer to 7 years
Dude, all of the conversations  but the main quest dialogue in nms is procedural, I genuinely think an AI would do a better job of it than the system that's there.  Also, you really underestimate how good AI is going to get in the coming years.  By the end of this decade we won't be able to tell the difference, and at that point what does it matter?
https://youtu.be/jH-6-ZIgmKY

Watch this. This was literally one year ago.
